Using the Scenario Editor

Overview

The Scenario Editor (scen.exe) is used in Gladiator to create the levels players
fight in. Each scenario, or game level, actually consists of two files: a PIX
file, which holds the map or background information, and an FSS file, which
contains information about the enemies, treasure, exits, and other special
items. Using the scenario editor, you can modify both files visually, as they
will appear in the game.

There are several main functions the scenario editor provides. These include
loading and saving scenario files, modifying the background map (trees, water,
walls, etc.), and adding or changing enemy and friendly characters or
items. Each of these will be explained in more detail in the following
sections.

For quick help while in the editor, press 'H'. This will pop up a short list of
available commands. Pressing SPACE will return you to the standard editing mode.

Before You Begin

Before running the scenario editor, make sure that the directory you are running
it from corresponds to the directories listed in the glad.cfg file. The easiest
way to ensure this is to run the editor from your normal Gladiator directory,
and make sure your settings (as specified by setup.exe) match the directory you
are using. So if you are running GLAD and the scenario editor from C:\GLAD, make
sure the directories listed in glad.cfg match correctly.

Creating a New Scenario

The easiest way to create a scenario of your own is to begin with an existing
scenario and modify it until you have something you like. The one element of a
scenario you can't easily control with the scenario editor is the map
dimensions. Thus, to create a small scenario, load a small scenario, such as
level one; to create a large scenario, load a larger scenario, such as level 18.

To begin with, let's assume we want to create a level similar to level 1. To
load the level, hit L (for Load), then S (for Scenario). A small box will pop up
asking for the scenario name. The standard scenario naming convention in
Gladiator is the word 'SCEN' followed by the number of the scenario. So in this
case, type in "scen1" (without the quotes) and hit return. After a brief pause,
the level should pop up with the background and objects loaded.

Now it's time to make our own version of this scenario. To avoid any conflicts,
we'll call it scenario 99 (because there isn't a scen99 currently in
Gladiator). The first thing we need to do is to rename the FSS, or object-layer,
file. To do this, hit N (for New Name), followed by S (for Scenario). Again,
this will pop up a small test-entry box. By default, the box will display the
name of the current scenario (scen1 in our case). Type in "scen99" and hit
return. Although not much will happen, you should notice the name in the upper
right corner of the screen change from SCEN1 to SCEN99.

Next, we need to change the name of the background, PIX, file (so that we don't
overwrite what's already there). Again, hit N for new name, but this time follow
it with G (for Grid). The word GRID is another word we'll use in the scenario
editor to mean the background map data. Finally, type "scen99" again. This will
save a matching map file, which will be automatically saved with the scenario.

Now that we've specified that we're working on a new level, let's make sure to
save it! Hit S (for Save), followed by S (for Scenario). Saving a scenario will
automatically save its associated PIX mapfile. If you ever want to save the map
file without saving the rest of the data, just hit S for save, then G for grid.

A Brief Detour: The Screen Layout

Now that we've begun our level editing, let's detour for a bit and take a look
at the screen layout. In general, the scenario editor screen looks much like a
one-player Gladiator game. Most of the screen area -- about the leftmost two
thirds -- is devoted to displaying the map as it currently exists. Along the
right edge of the screen, from top to bottom are:
  * Information Box. This is a large gray box with several lines of text in
    it. These lines, form top to bottom, are:
      * The name of the scenario (FSS) file, which will usually look something
        like SCEN1.
      * The second line is the name of the map (PIX) file used for the
        background.
      * The current editing mode. It will either be OBS, which means you are
        editing the object layer on the map, or MAP, which means you are editing
        the map background -- changing the tiles.
      * The team number and object you are ready to place. This line will look
        something like "0:SOLDIER", which would mean you were ready to place a
        soldier of team number 0 (zero).
      * The level of the current object you are placing. Generally, the higher
        the level number, the more powerful the object will be.
      * The current alignment of object placement. It will either be ON, which
        means objects will be placed in a grid; OFF, which means objects may be
        placed randomly; or STACK, which means many objects can be placed on top
        of each other.
      * The object count. In a rough way, this will display the number of
        objects in a level. It gets confused easily, and should be used just for
        rough estimates (don't place 500 objects!).
  * Select tile display. Below the information box, a map tile will "float" on
    the screen. This is the tile you are going to draw onto the map, which in
    map-editing mode.
  * Tile selection box. This is a four-by-four box which displays map tiles you
    can select. The arrow keys cycle the box up and down for more choices, while
    the left mouse button selects a new tile.
  * Radar screen. Like normal Gladiator, this will show you a miniature
    representation of the level map.

Back to Designing

Okay, now that we have level 99 set up to edit, let's get to work! As a quick
note, if you need to come back to this later, just load the level by pressing L
(for load), S (for scenario), and then scen99 as the name to load.

The first thing to do, generally, is to remove any objects already on the map,
as they just clutter things up. To do this, we'll introduce the first "Magic
Key" of the scenario editor. Press Control-D (CONTRL plus D), and all the
objects will be deleted. This gives us a fresh map to start work on.

The second thing to do is to change to map mode. If you look at the gray
information box in the upper right, you'll probably see a line which reads,
"MODE: OBS". This means you are currently in object editing mode. To switch to
background (map) editing mode, press M. The line should now read, "MODE:
MAP". Pressing M will toggle back and forth between the two modes.

Now that we're ready to edit the map, take a look at the currently selected
tile, which is beneath the information box. It's probably something like a wall
piece, but it really doesn't matter. Click the left mouse button somewhere on
the main map area, and you should replace the current tile -- grass, tree,
water, whatever -- with whatever you have selected. You can drag the mouse
around to make patterns of the tiles. If you need to move the screen view, just
move the mouse to any edge of the screen, and it will scroll in that direction.

After a bit of this, you'd probably rather put down something more useful! To do
this, you use the tile selection box, which is underneath your currently
selected tile. It is a four by four box of background tiles you can choose from,
and is probably filled with different types of grass. Clicking the left mouse
button on any of these pieces will select is as the current drawing tile, kind
of like a paint program. Try choosing some normal grass and smearing it around
the map. Since there are more than 16 background tiles in Gladiator, you can't
see them all at once. To scroll the selection box to see more choices, use the
UP and DOWN arrow keys. This will display all the possible backgrounds you can
paint with.

Sometimes a piece you want is already located on the map view. Rather than
having to scroll through the selection box, you can right click on the map tile,
and it will become the selected piece (kind of like the eyedropper tool in art
programs). This can be especially useful if you have buildings or trees you want
to replicate, each with several sets of tiles (upper left, upper middle, upper
right...).

Finally, when editing the background map, you'll notice that many times when you
put down a tile, the computer will "smooth" the tile and its surrounding area
automatically. For example, if you put down a "piece" of forest, the editor will
attempt to blend the tiles so that the image looks visually correct. Similarly,
water tiles will attempt to round themselves out. Most of the time, the
computer's choices will be correct. From time to time, however, you'll want to
put down exactly the piece you have selected, without worrying about
"smoothing". To stop the auto-smoothing, hold down control while placing your
tiles. This will cause the tile to be placed exactly as it appears.

That's it as far as map editing goes! Remember to save the scenario frequently
as you edit it (S, S) so that you can go back to earlier versions. After you
have a basic map layout, it's time to start placing objects. You can always
switch back to map editing later, even after adding objects, but getting a basic
map design down first usually makes things easier.

Adding Objects - Populating the Level

Objects of all types -- enemies, treasure, potions, teleporters -- are what
really make a level come alive. Although the placing of objects is more
complicated than background map editing, once you've learned the basic
operation, you should have no problem placing the objects of your choice.

Information about what type of object you have selected will be displayed in the
information box in the upper right corner. The most important line here consists
of an object's team number followed by the object name. For example, the
scenario editor will start out with a soldier on team zero, which looks like:
    0:SOLDIER
the team number of an object is one of its most important attributes. Any
"living" object, such as a soldier or archer, will fight according to its team
number. For example, the soldier on team zero will attack anyone he encounters
who is on a different team than he is. By default, team zero is always the
player's team in Gladiator -- anyone you put down who is on team zero will help
the player, and can be controlled by him, while all other teams will be
enemies. To specify the team number of your object "pen", press the number keys
0 through 7. As you probably know, each team gets its own color -- team zero is
red, team one is green, etc.

Enemies and Allies

Let's try placing a few objects down. First, make sure you're in object editing
mode -- the display should say "MODE: OBS". If it doesn't, press M until it
does. Then, basically, just left click on the map somewhere. If nothing happens,
make sure you're clicking on passable terrain, such as grass or dirt. Because
Gladiator characters can't swim, the scenario editor won't normally let you
place objects in the water, over trees, or straddling walls.

Assuming you've hit a clear area, a soldier should appear. If you haven't
changed the team number, he'll be red -- a friendly unit. Just as you can drag
the mouse to draw map tiles, you can also, if you wish, drag the mouse around to
draw lines of soldiers.

Changing Object Type: Of course, if all you even placed was soldiers, things
wouldn't be very interesting! To cycle through the list of available troop
types, click the right mouse button (make sure you're in object mode). The
display should change from something like "0:SOLDIER" to "0:ELF". Each time you
right click the mouse, you'll cycle through the list of troops. Eventually, the
list will cycle back to soldier again. Noe you can place a variety of characters
down on the battlefield.

Changing Team: Most of the time you place characters, however, you don't want to
help the player - you want to give them some opposition! And right now, we're
just placing "good" characters - they're all on team zero! Remember that if we
want to put down enemies, they need to be on team number one or higher. Try
changing the team number of the currently selected object (press the number keys
1 through 7) and placing more characters. Now we have some enemies!

Changing Level: Even with a variety of enemies, however, your level won't be
very tough if all the opponents are level 1 wimps! We need to raise the
difficulty - say, to around 3rd or 4th level. To do this, press the left and
right brackets ([,]). Pressing the left bracket will lower the level of the
currently selected object; pressing the right bracket will raise it. Press the
right bracket until the line listing the current level shows 3 or 4 (it should
look like LVL: 4) and place a few more troops. They will look the same, but
these troops will be tougher than the first ones. Note that changing level only
affect new troops you place - so anyone you placed who was level 1 will remain
that way.

Adding a Name: Sometimes it can be fun to name some of the enemies - give the
level some flavor. To do this, hold down the R key (for Rename) and left click a
character. Now you can type the new name of the character, with a few
restrictions: The name cannot contain spaces, and it must be no more than eight
characters! If you try to enter a name longer than 8 characters, Very Bad Things
may occur. After you've hit return, a small information box will pop up to show
the new name of the character.

Getting Information: So now you've placed a few troops with different levels,
but you can't tell who's who! We need a way to inspect a character to see what
level he is, what team he belongs to, etc. To do this, hold down the I key (this
stands for Information) and left click a character. This should bring up a small
information box which will list the vital statistics of the object, including
its level.

Toggling Alignment: Most of the time when you place objects and characters onto
a scenario map, you'd like them to line up - this makes it easier to create
groups of enemies, place treasures, etc. Sometimes, however, a different effect
is desired, and for that, Gladiator has three types of alignment offered. The
current alignment style is listed in the information box on the line which will
read "ALIGN: ON". To change alignment mode, press G (for Grid Alignment). The
modes are:
  * ON: Objects won't overlap, and will always fit to an invisible grid the same
        size as the background tiles.
  * OFF: Objects can overlap and "smear" to a large degree. Drawing in this mode
         can be dangerous, as you can quickly accumulate hundreds of overlapping
         objects.
  * STACK: Objects can overlap, but will do so slowly. This is the best way to
           create "piles" of gold, food, or treasure.

Removing Objects: So now we've added various characters, and set their
levels. But now we want to remove that row of level 1 elves who just won't cut
it. To remove an object, hold down CONTROL key and left click the object. If you
have problems getting the object to vanish, try toggling the alignment to a
different mode - this will often fix the problem. Using the CONTROL key, you can
delete any objects you don't want. Remember that if you want to delete all the
objects on a level, you can use the CONTROL-D combination to do ti all at once.

That's all there is to adding enemies to a level! To find out how to add other
objects, specify character starting location, and other information, read on.

Cycling Through Object Types

To get to other kinds of objects you can place in the scenario editor, you need
to cycle through the supported list. To do this, hit the letter O (for Object
Type) and watch the word that appears after the number on the team-number/object
line (i.e., 0:SOLDIER). Repeatedly pressing O will take you through the five
types of objects you can place in the scenario editor: living objects, monster
generators, player markers, treasure items, and weapons.

Just like when placing characters on the map, right clicking the mouse will
cycle through the type of object available in the current category. For example,
press O until the display reads something like "0:TENT". This means you have a
skeleton tent selected - skeleton tents will "create" more skeletons during the
course of the level. Now click the right mouse button. The word "tent" should
change to "tower", indicating that you've now selected a mage tower instead of a
skeleton tent. All type selection will work like this, in any object category.

Place Generators

Remember to use the brackets to set the level before you place the exit!
Generators are objects which create more enemies during the course of a
level. For example, a tent will generate skeletons. The level of the generator
determines the level of monsters it creates. For example, a level 3 tent will
create level 3 skeletons. Additionally, higher level generators are harder for
player to destroy.

Other types of generators in Gladiator include towers, which create mages;
bonepiles, which create ghosts; and treehouses, which create elves.

Placing Player Markers

Player makers are what determines where a player's team starts out on the
level. Remember, just placing characters of team zero will give the players
assistance, but won't reserve any area for their own team members.

Each player marker looks like a large square, about two by two tiles large. Each
player marker you put down will allow one team member to show up at that
location at the beginning of the level. Putting down too many markers won't hurt
- they'll just "vanish" when the level begins. Putting down too few markers,
however, will restrict the number of team members who can fight in the
level. For example, if a player has a team of 20 troops, but you only put down
10 markers, only the first 10 troops will actually appear in the level.

Currently, the team number of a player marker has no effect in the game - all
the player troops are considered to be on team zero. Eventually, when we get
player-v-player play implemented, a team number 4 marker will work only for
player number 4, etc.

Placing Treasure

Treasure of all types is often what makes levels worth playing. In general, the
level of a treasure determines its potency. For example, a level 3 drumstick
will heal 3 times the hitpoints of a level 1 drumstick.

Some "treasure" items, such as exits, keys, and teleporters, work somewhat
differently, and will be explained below. The standard treasure types, however,
include:
  * drumstick: Generic food; this will heal the character who 'eats' it some
               number of hit points.
  * gold: Treasure worth "cash" value; approx. 100 per level
  * silver: Treasure worth "cash" value; approx. 50 per level
  * magic: A potion which adds magic points - even above maximum - to the
           character who drinks it
  * invis: A potion which gives limited invisibility to the character who drinks
           it
  * invuln: A potion which gives temporary invulnerability to the character who
            drinks it
  * flight: A potion which gives temporary flight to the character who drinks it
  * blood: A bloodspot; used for effect only
  * speed: A potion which adds to a character's movement rate -- one speed
           setting per level; try to avoid values higher than 8!

Placing Exits: Exits are a special type of treasure - they don't get "eaten",
but rather provide a link to the next level once players have defeated all
enemies. If you don't have any exits on your level, the players will "win" as
soon as all enemies are dead, and automatically go to the next higher level. For
example, if you're working on level 99 and don't place any exits, players will
automatically move to level 100 when they complete 99.

Exits lead to the level specified by their level, oddly enough, as set by the
left and right brackets :) For example, if you place a level 5 exit, the exit
will lead to scenario level 5. Remember to use the brackets to set the level
before you place the exit! Having several exist on a level, each of which leads
to a different level, is no problem, and can make interesting "split" paths for
players to follow. It is also generally a good idea to have an exit leading back
to the previous level, where players came from. This will allow players to
retreat back to a safe level (and pick a different path) if they decide your
level is too tough for them!

Placing Teleporters: Teleporters work in groups, based on their level, also. All
teleporters which share the same level will form a loop from A to B to C and
back to A again. For example, say you have two teleporters (A and B) of level 1,
and 3 more (C, D, and E) of level 2. A and B will just bounce you to the
opposite teleporter - A to B, and B to A. C, D, and E will form a loop: C goes
to D, D goes to E, and E goes back to C again.

If you're not sure if your teleporters are set up properly, save your level,
then reload it. After doing this, getting information on the object (press I and
left click) will list some information about where the teleporter leads.

One last thing to remember about placing teleporters is to avoid placing them
near walls. This is because large characters may "stick out" over the edge of
the teleporter when they arrive. If they overlap a wall, they will start taking
damage - hardly what you want! So try to leave the eight squares surrounding a
teleporter passable. You can always surround it with carpet, wood floors, or
other things to make it look special.

Placing Keys: Keys unlock doors which share their level. For example, placing a
level 2 key will display the message, "Tom picks up key 2", if the character Tom
touches the key. Tom will now be able to unlock any door of level 2.

Note that keys don't vanish - they always stay around, so that many players can
pick up the same key.

Placing Weapons

Although weapons show up as one of the types you can put down, there's not
usually any reason to do so. Why? Because, as you know, weapons have a limited
lifetime. So even if you put a row of fireballs across a path, they'll vanish
shortly after the level starts.

the only exception to this is the door weapon. Why are doors weapons? Don't ask
:) Actually, the main reason for this is so that anyone who is on the door's
team may pass through without a key, while all others are blocked. So, when
placing a door, remember:
  * If you don't want anyone to be able to pass through, set the team number to
    a team not represented on the level. If you want players to be able to pass
    through, set the team number to zero; if you want the enemy to pass through,
    set the team number to that of the enemy.
  * Make sure to set the level of the door to that of the key you want to unlock
    it, if any. So if you want your door to be unlocked by key (level) 3, set
    the door's level to 3, as well.

Finishing Up

That's basically it! With this knowledge, you should be able to create, play,
and distribute your own levels! To play the level in Gladiator, make sure the
.PIX and .FSS files are in the game directory, and then select "Set Level" from
the Continue menu in the picker. Just enter the level number of your new
scenario, and you're set.

Feel free to experiment with other aspects of the scenario editor not listed
here, and if you have any questions, please sent them to glad-reg, or to me at
tricket@netcom.com. Have fun!
