& command

{{SUBJECT}}
  Help for Galactic Bloodshed commands

{{SYNOPSIS}}
  Use
    'help command list'  -- For an itemized list of commands
    'help command index' -- For an alphabetized summary of commands
  Or 'help command <topic>' where 'topic' is any of the following:

& allocate

{{NAME}}
  allocate [0] -- Transfer global action points to star system

{{SYNTAX}}
  allocate <action points>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The allocate command transfers global action points to a star system. The one
return parameter is the number of APs to transfer and this value must be a
positive integer. Upon executing the command this amount will be transferred to
the star system of the current scope. The scope can be set to a planet or lower,
but allocate will not work from the universe (or root, '/') scope. The maximum
number of APs you can have at the global and star system levels is a constant
determined by the deity. The default value for this maximum is 255.
  Once executed, this command can not be reversed. Action points can only be
transferred from the global level to a stellar level, not vice versa.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  allocate 10 (Transfers 10 APs from the global level to a star system's AP
               store)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  actionpoints

& analysis

{{NAME}}
  analysis [0] -- Provide sector report for planet

{{SYNTAX}}
  analysis [[-] [<sector type>] [<race #>] [<scope>]]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Use analysis to obtain a detailed listing of the highest or lowest five
sectors in each sector category and a summary of holdings, yours and alien, on
the planet. The sector categories reported are troops, resources, efficiency,
fertilization, mobilization, population, and population capacity. You can not
analyze a planet you have not explored or have received information about.
  If a '-' is specified, the lowest five sectors will be reported. All
additional parameters are completely optional, but when specified, restrict the
type of sector reported:
    sector type    Reports only sectors of specified type. The sector types is
                   specified by the character used to represent the terrain of
                   the sector and must be from the set of characters:
                     . * ^ ) # d o % ~
                   ('d' is used to denote desert sectors to avoid confusion with
                   the leading '-' in the analysis command.)
    race #         Reports only sectors belonging to the specified race.
    scope          If a planet's scope is specified, that planet's sectors will
                   be analyzed and reported. If a star scope is specified, all
                   explored planets in the specified star system will be
                   reporter. If no scope is specified, the current scope will be
                   used.

{{EXAMPLE}}:
  analysis       (Produce analysis from all sectors of planet of the current
                  scope)
  anaylsis - # 7 (Produce analysis from lowest 5 ice sectors owned by player 7
                  of the planet in the current scope)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  survey, map

& announce

{{NAME}}
  announce [0] -- Send message to other races in a star system

{{SYNTAX}}
  announce <message>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to communicate with other races in a star system. If your
current scope is set to a star system or lower, and you inhabit this particular
system (a ship is enough), a message is sent to all other races who inhabit this
system, provided that their current scope also includes this system.
  If you do not inhabit the system, an error message is returned informing you
of the situation. If your current scope is at the universe (or root '/) level,
announce is identical to the broadcast command.

{{EXAMPLE}}
announce Is there anybody out there? (Send a message to all races inhabiting a
                                      a star system whose current scope includes
                                      that system)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  communications, broadcast, think, post

& appoint

{{NAME}}
  appoint [0] -- Initialize governor position and assign a password

{{SYNTAX}}
  appoint <governor #> <name> <password> <rank>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command initializes and assigns a name and password for a new governor
for your race. The governor number must be a currently inactive spot. Use the
governors command to check the status of your governor positions. If a position
is labeled ACTIVE, but is not in use anymore and you with to re-initialize the
spot, use the revoke command to free the position before executing appoing for a
new governor.
  Rank is one of these:
    novice  - Can communicate and gets general game info (post, victory, ...)
    private - Like novice + general race info (power, colonies, ...)
    captain - Like private + ship and combat commands (build, fire, assault, ...)
    general - Almost as powerful as leader
  If rank is not specified, governor will be private.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  appoint 1 Stan blahblah general (Appoint a new general governor named 'Stan'
                                   to position 1 with password 'blahblah')

{{SEE ALSO}}
  governors, revoke, grant, rank, promote

& arm

{{NAME}}
  arm [0] -- Convert civilian population to military units

{{SYNTAX}}
  arm <sector x,y> [<# of civs to arm>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The arm command transforms civilians into miliary units. The current scope
must be a planet and sector coordinates must be specified. This maximum number
able to be armed is given by the fomula:
    maxarm = planet destruct * ((2 * sector mobilization) + 1)
but can not exceed the population of the sector; e.g. if you have 20d on a
planet and the sector's mobilization is 5, a total of 220 civs could be armed.
If you specify a number of civs to arm greater than maxarm, only maxarm will be
armed. If the number of civs to convert is not specified, maxarm or the total
population of the sector is armed, whichever is less.
  Arming a sector also costs money. The method used to compute the total cost of
arming is selected by the deity before the game begins. Typical methods charge a
constant amount (default is 5) per unit armed, or charnge money equal to the
race's fight characteristic per unit armed. The default method is to use the
fight characteristic; e.g. if you armed 120 civs whose fight value is 6, you
need 720 money to arm them. If you do not have the required amount of money to
arm the number you specify, no civs will be armed.
  Use the disarm command to reverse the transformation. Destruct used to arm is
lost and is not regained by the used of disarm.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  arm 1,5 20 (Arm 20 civs from sector 1,5; will cost
              20 / ((sector mob * 2) + 1) destruct and (20 * 5) money)

{{SEE ALSO}}:
  miliatry, destruct, disarm, mobilize

& assault

{{NAME}}
  assault [1] -- Attempt a capture of an enemy ship in space

{{SYNTAX}}
  assault [#]<boarding ship #> [#]<target ship #> [<boarders [civ | mil]]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  An assault attempts to dock with and capture an alien ship. You must specify
your attacking ship and the target ship. You may also specify the number of
units to use in the boarding. If you do not specify this number, the maximum
number of military units on your ship will be used. If you specify a number to
board, the type of units can also be specified, civilian or miliatry. If you do
not specify this fourth argument, the boarders will be miliatyr units (see NOTE
below, though).
  Both ships that you specify must be in the same scope and must be within a
minimum docking distance of each other set by the deity (the default value is
10). An assault includes a small maneuver by the boarding ship and it must have
sufficient fuel for the move:
    fuel = 0.05 + ((0.05 * dist) * sqrt(ship mass))
  Before the actual assault occurs, the defending ship will get a chance to fire
its defensive weapons. The details about defensive fire can be found under the
command fire. If neither ship is destroyed in this phase, your ship docks with
the target and the assault will occur. Along with unit casualties, ships will be
damaged in the assault and may be destroyed. If both ships remain and you have
eliminated all enemy crew on the target ship, you gain control of the ship and
your boarding party moves in. If you fail to kill the entire crew, your assault
is repulsed and your units retreat back to the boarding ship.
  If you success in gaining contorl of the enemy ship, you get morale point
equal to the ship's build cost and the former owner loses this amount. If you
must retreat, the enemy gains morale equals to your race's Fight, and you loose
this amount. You also gain information about the race you are attacking,
especially if you are successful.
  NOTE:
  ** If you have no military units aboard your ship and do not explicitly
  specify civilians for the assault, you will receive a message that you have no
  troops to board with. The assault command always assumes military units unless
  you specify the number and type 'civ'.
  ** You can not use a docked ship or a ship in a hanger for the boarding ship.
  ** You can not use pods or terraformers for boarding with the assault command.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  assault #453 #998  (Assault ship #998 with ship #453 with all military units
                      onboard)
  assault #1202 #309 5 civ  (Assault ship #309 with ship #1202 with 5 civilians)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  combat, dock, fire

& autoreport

{{NAME}}
  autoreport [0] -- Toggle automatic update reports from a planet

{{SYNTAX}}
  autoreport <planet>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command toggles the automatic reporting feature of a planet. The single
parameter is optional, but must be a valid planet scope if specified. If not
specified, the current scope must be a planet.
  When autoreport is set for a planet, a telegram will be sent at each update to
the planet owner describing the production, discoveries, and status of the
planet. To avoid an overflow of unread telegrams, the reports will only be sent
for a set number of updates after the autoreport command is executed. This
number can be changed by the deity, but the default value causes the planet to
report to the owner for seven updates before automatically shutting off. If you
wish the reports to continue, you must execute autoreport again.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  colonies

& bid

{{NAME}}
  bid [0] -- List market items and make a bid

{{SYNTAX}}
  bid [ <resource_type> | <lot #> <bid> ]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Use the bid command to check the Galactic Bloodshed Commodities Market for
current resources being sold or to place a bid on one of the lot numbers.
Without arguments, this command lists all the lots currently on the market. If
you specifiy a commodity type as a single argument (r, f, x, d), you will get a
list of only those lots selling that commodity. When you decide to place a bid,
specify both the lot number and the amount you wish to offer; you must have the
money before you place the bid. The money will not be subtracted from your
account until you win the bid and the goods are solde to you -- you must still
have enough money then! The race with the higest bid on the second update after
the lot appears on the market wins the bidding. A lot will have a '*' next to
it's lot number if it has been on the market for one update -- it will be sold
the following update.
  When you place a bid, you must be at a planet scope and that planet be under
your control. Furthermore, you must have a ship which is able to receive
shipments on or in orbit around the planet. Currently, only five ships can serve
as shipping docks: @, a government center; S, a station; H, a habitat; J, a
space port; and !, a god-ship. Upon winning a bid, the goods will be delivered
to this scope.
  With the defaults, you must bid 10% higher than the previous bid on a lot for
your offer to be accepted, but this value can be changed by the deity. You will
be notified if you have been outbid by another player. Keep in mind that there
is also a shipping charge for the transfer of the commodity. If you can not pay
the shipping on the update when the lot is sold to you, your race will lose
morale equal to the amount you are short, divided by ten -- this loss is
equivalent to the moral loss when you are unable to maintain your ships and
troops. This shipping charge is given by the formule:
    shipping = (1.0 - Exp(-(rdist / dc))) * bid
Where rdist is the distance between the bidder and seller star systems, rounded
to the 10000s (e.g. 435304 -> 430000), and dc is a distance constant set by the
deity (the default is 200000).

{{EXAMPLE}}
  bid d        (List all lots selling destruct)
  bid 5 10000  (Bid 10000 on lot number 5)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  money, sell

& block

{{NAME}}
  block [0] -- Display list of power blocks

{{SYNTAX}}
  block [ <block leader #> | player <race> ]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  With no arguments, the block command lists all alliance groups, called power
blocks, that are in effect. Each group is listed with its current stats as
estimated by your race's knowledge of that group's leader.
  Blocks are numbered by the race number of their leader. If block is called
with a single number for an argument, the report will list all of that
particular block's members and their stats as estimated by your race.
  If the keyword {{player}} and a number are specified with the block command,
that race's status with regard to power blocks is reported: which, if any, block
the race belongs to, whether it has been invited to join a block, or whether it
has pledged a block.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  block player 21         (List the block status of race 21)
  block player Neighbors  (List the block status of Neighbors)
  block 12                (List all members and stats of power block 12)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  blocks, victory, invite, pledge, uninvite, unpledge

& bombard

{{NAME}}
  bombard [1] -- Fire a ship's weapons at a planet

{{SYNTAX}}
  bombard <ship #> [ <sector x,y> [ <strength> ] ]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to damage or destroy sectors on a planet from an orbiting
or landed ship. If the ship is landed, the specified sect must be adjacent to
the sector the ship occupies. If the sector to be hit is not specified, a random
one will be computed by the server. If the strength of the attack is not
specified, the ship will use the maximum strength possible (see the fire command
for a discussion of this calculation). If a strength greater than this computed
number is specified in the bombard command, the player will be notified that the
ship's guns have been reset to fire with the maximum possible strength. A planet
can not be attacked from orbit if it still has operational Planetary Defense
Networks (ship n).
  The damage from a bombard will be most intense in the targeted sector, but
surrounding sectors may also be damaged. If the damage is severe and the sector
type had previously been altered (plating or terraforming for example), there is
a chance the sector may mutate back to its natural state. There is also a chance
that the sector will be wasted, killing all civs, leaving a random number of
troops, crippling the sector, and increasing the toxicity of the planet. If the
sector is not wasted, normal damage will be inflicted.
  A planet will retaliate, if possible, using its planetary guns if at least one
sector has been wasted in an attack. Any ships which are in orbit around the
planet (using the order command) will retaliate against the bombarding ship. No
retaliation, planetary or ship, will be triggered if the bombarding ship is a
Mech (R). However, note that Mechs must be landed on the planet to initiate an
attack and, thus, may only attack adjacent sectors.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  bombard #985          (Bomard a random sector using default gun strength)
  bombard @1042 10,3 5  (Bombard sector 10,3 at strength of 5)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  combat, fire

& broadcast

{{NAME}}
  broadcast [0] -- Send a message to all players logged in

{{SYNTAX}}
  broadcast <message>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows players to communicate with each other. All text following
the broadcast command is sent to each player currently logged in, unless they
are GAGed (see the toggle command).

{{EXAMPLE}}
  broadcast Boo!  (Sends "Boo!" to every player logged in and ungaged)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  communications, announce, channel, emote, think

& bug

{{NAME}}
  bug [0] -- Make a bug report

{{SYNTAX}}
  bug <message>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command will send a bug report vai Internet email to the host (god) of
the game while recording it to the maintenance database. It assures prompt
action on possible bugs. If you find a bug, please use this mechanism to alert
the god player.
  Please, before submitting a bug, look at '__help bugrep__' and make sure the
bug you found has not yet been reported. The '__help bugrep__' page will also
show you the current status of each bug and the working narrative.
  Bugs move through the following STATUS pipeline:
    REPORTED - Bug is newly reported by user.
    ASSIGNED - God Player has assigned a bugid and passed it to a coder.
    REVIEWED - Coder has reviewed and replicated the bug.
    FIXING   - Coder is working on the bug.
    TESTING  - A bug solution is being tested in the debugging server.
    PENDING  - Bug has been fixed and is ready to be loaded into the server.
    COMPLETE - Bug has been removed from the production server.
  A bug may also be marked as CANCELLED at any time with reasons given in the
narrative.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  __bugrep__, page, communications

& build

{{NAME}}
  build [0] -- Construct a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  Current Scope     Syntax
  Planet:       (I)  build <ship type> <sector x,y> [<# to build>]
  Factory:     (II)  build [<# to build>]
  Other ship: (III)  build <ship type> [<# to build>]
  Any scope:         build ? [<ship type>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The build command allows a race to convert their stored resources into useful
machinery. Many different types of ships, buildings, devices, and weapons can be
built in Galactic Bloodshed, each with its own special characteristics and
abilities. Due to the complex design of ships in the game, this command has
several variants, each of which will be dicussed below. At a minimum, for every
build variant, a race must have the minimum technology level and resources on
hand to create the specified ship.
  Each ship has a default set of parameters which can be listed by using the
command build ?. This variant can be executed at any scope. Without any
argument, this command will print a table of all the default parameters for all
ship types. Given a specific ship type, this variant will print a short
description of the ship, where the ship can be built, and the default parameters
for that ship.
  The other variants of the bulid command arise since ships can be built in a
variety of locations in Galactic Bloodhshed: on a planet surface, in factories,
in other ships, or in space by other ships. Certain ship types have restricted
build locations. Use the build ? command to see where a ship may be built. There
are currently five build locations for ships:
    On a planet
    In a factory: F
    In hanger of some ships
    In habitat
    Outside some ships
  The first class of ships can use the first build variant (I) when the current
scope is set to a planet. The sector the ship is built in must be specified
along with the ship type. A race must be above the mimimum technology level to
build the ship and must have the resources available in the planetary stores.
The planet must not be enslaved to another race. A governor who attempts to
build on a planet must have control over that planet. The specified sector must
be owned by the builder, have at least one civilian on the sector, and not be
wasted. A second Quarry (q) cannot be built on a sector.
  The second class of ships must be build by Factories (F). A brief summary of
the building of these ships follows below (for a more detailed description, see
the manual section on ships):
    1) A Factory (F) must be built. Factories can be built on planets or in
       Habitats -- refer to the appropriate paragraph in this command to build a
       Factory. The rest of this summary assumes the Factory is on a planet.
       Factories on Habitats function similarly.
    2) Change scope to the Factory.
    3) Decide which ship types this Factory will produce and execute the make
       command at this scope.
    4) The design specifications may be changed via the modify command at this
       scope.
    5) Once the design has been set, order the Factory on. An initial start-up
       cost for the Factory will be extracted from the planet's resource
       stockpile. This cost is twice the resources needed to build its specified
       ship. Ths type of ship produced and the design specifications cannot be
       changed once the Factory is online!
    6) Factories are built with 75% damage. They do not require resources to be
       fixed but will repair themselves over the course of several update --
       {{but only after they have been ordered online}}.
    7) Once the Factory is completely repaired, change scope to the Factory
       again. The second build command variant (II) can now be executed to
       produce ships from the Factory. The planet must have sufficient resources
       to produce the ships. The ships will appear on the same sector of the
       planet as the Factory.
  The third and fourth class, when built, appear in the hanger of the building
ship. The current scope must be set to the building ship, where the thid build
variant (III) can be used to construct the ships. The building ship must have
adequate hanger space and resources for the ship to be built.
  The first class of ships are built outside of the constructing ship, and thus
hanger space is not a factor. The third build variant (III) is used for this
class also. The building ships of this class cannot construct ships when landed.
Shuttles (s) can be loaded with more resources than their specified maximum, but
they cannot land while overloaded (see the related command load). These
resources can then be used to make the large ships in this class.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  build F 5,4  (Build a Factory at sector 5,4. Current scope must be a planet)
  build : 5    (Build five Space Probes inside a ship's hanger)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  ships, technology, make, modify

& capital

{{NAME}}
  capital [5] -- Designate the new seat of government

{{SYNTAX}}
  captial [#shipnum]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Your capital is a "Governmental Center" ship which produces action points as
the workings of a government. It is posible to maintain more than one
governmental center in your empire for use as backups in case something should
happen to your capital (of course, they are very expensive).
  Without a capital, no AP's will be produced. Also if the capital is damaged or
understaffed the government will experience a slowdown in proportion to its
handicap.
  If no argument is specified, the current efficiency of your capital is
displayed. This is proportional to the number of crew (officials working in the
capital) and the damage of the capital. Efficiency does not influence
actionpoints production however.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  actionpoints

& capture

{{NAME}}
  capture [1] -- Order population to attempt to seize an alien ship landed in
                 the same sector.

{{SYNTAX}}
  capture <#shipno> <boarders> [<what>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is similar to the 'assault' command and the agreesive move
command. The player designates which landed alien ship he wishes to assault.
If the sector where the ship is located is occupied by the player, the combat
strengths of the player (attacker) and alien (defender) are computed. The combat
strengths depend on number of beings, fighting ability, sector terrain and
technology of the races as well as ship sizes morale and armor. The assault is
evaluated and casualties are removed from each defender and attacker.
  A player may attack with as many population as the sector contains. If the
number of boarders isn't specified, all occupants of the sector will assault the
ship.
    Defense strengths of terrain:
      land   = 1
      sea    = 1
      mount  = 3
      wasted = 0
      gas    = 2
      ice    = 2
      forest = 3
      desert = 2
      plate  = 4
  This command cannot be used on planets that have been enslaved to another
player.
  The player can specify whether he/she will use civilians or military for the
assault. Specify "civ" or "mil" for <what>, the default is military.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  assaul, enslave, morale

& center

{{NAME}}
  center [0] -- Change orbit map center to another star or planet

{{SYNTAX}}
  center [star/planet]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Map centerpoint is always the same system where scope has been latest.
However, if you'd like to examine better the neighborhood of some specific
region, you can change the map centerpoint using this command. This is
particularly useful at closer zoom values. The center command takes either a
star name or planet as an argument. If no argument is given the centerpoint
is reset to 0,0 at the current scope.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  explore, orbit, stars, zoom

& cew

{{NAME}}
  cew [1] -- Fire CEWs 'confined energy weapons'

{{SYNTAX}}
  cew <firing ship> <target ship>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  CEWs (confined energy weapons) are energy weapons which have an optimal range.
Unlike lasers and guns which have their maximum hit percentage at close range,
CEWs can be designed to have an optimal range. The optimal range is set using
the modify command during ship design. The hit probability is independent of the
firing/target ship's disposition and has maximum at the optimal range R:
  hit probability = 100 * exp(-50 * (f - 1)^2)
where
  f = (r + 1) / (R + 1)
At the optimal range r = R, the hit probability is normalized to 100%.
  CEWs also have a strength which is prescribed during the ship modification
procedure. The strength of a CEW is in equivalent destruct units. Each CEW
attack uses 2 * destruct fuel units to execute. Unlike normal fire attacks
(lasers and destruct), a CEW attack either hits or misses, according to the
above hit probability formula. If the attack hits, the hits (equal to the CEW
attack strength) are evaluated for penetration and damage according to the
normal damage procedures. If the hit misses, no damage is done.
  Once designed, a CEW range can be modified only upwards.
  CEW require a special technology. Some ships cannot install CEW technology.
  Technology limits on functions crystal ranges are proportional to the amount
of damage on the ship. Heavily damaged shpis may find their crystals breaking at
lower limits.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  fire, modify

& channel

{{NAME}}
  channel [0] -- Manage communication channels (beta)

{{SYNTAX}}
  channel [1|2|3] [xmit]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Multiple communications channel capabililty. There are three channels in GB,
numbered 1, 2, and 3. Players can send on any channel by using the number of the
channel you wish to send on. Channels are used with the broadcast and emote
commands. To set the transmit channel use 'channel <channel> xmit', to view
current channels use 'channel', to set channels to monitor use
'channel <channel>' (toggle). You will only receive messages for channels you
have turned on. By default, channel 1 is set upon login if all channels were OFF
at the time of the last logout.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  > channel 2 xmit
  Channel Status:
     One: RCV
     Two: RCV XMIT
   Three: OFF

{{SEE ALSO}}
  broadcast, emote

& colonies

{{NAME}}
  colonies [0] -- List colonies

{{SYNTAX}}
  colonies

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command list the attributes of all current colonies belonging to the
player. If the name of the planet is followed by an asterik '*', this means that
autoreport is on at that colony.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  production

& cs

{{NAME}}
  cs [0] -- Change scope

{{SYNTAX}}
  cs <-d> <path>  where path = <#shipnumber> | <:> | </[path]> | <..[/path]>
                               | [name] | next | prev

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  cs changes from the current operative scope to the specified one. If no scope
is specified, cs will change to the default scope. If the -d option is
specified, cs will make [path] the new default scope. If the word 'next' is used
as a path, the scope will be changed to your next colony; the word 'prev' goes
back on colony. You cannot cs into areas that have not yet been explored by you.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  scope, orbit

& declare

{{NAME}}
  declare [0] -- State relations with other races

{{SYNTAX}}
  declare <race> <status>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The fricition between two disparate races competing for the same limited
resources may be such that no matter what diplomatic means exist between them
(telegram), conflict may still ensue.
  To facilitate this, a player may declare his/her race's intentions toward
other races in the game, whether allied, neutral, or at war.
  When invoked, a prompt will ask how he wishes his relations to be with that
race, and the race number. This will be in effect until the user changes
his/her mind.
  A race's relation state affects the way a few things happen in the game:
  - A ship following another will 'lose sight' of that ship at a certain
    distance, if the other ship is not an ally.
  - Mines look for ships belonging to enemy players. If it finds one within its
    trigger radius, it will detonate.
  - A player is prompted when firing on or boarding (assault) a ship belonging
    to an ally.
  - Allied ships and planets do not return fire.
  - When bombard is set on a ship, that ship will fire at sectors owned by
    players the owner is at war with. If there are no such it finds players
    with which the owner is neutral.
  You may declare war, alliance, or neutrality.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  communication, relation

& defend

{{NAME}}
  defend [1] -- Shoot a planet at a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  defend <target> <x,y> [<strength>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  When using the 'defend' command the player must have the planet in question
as the current scope. Only ships in orbit or landed at the planet can be
designated.
  The maximum number of guns for a planet depends on planet size. The actual
number of guns a planet has available for use begins at 0, and will increase as
the sector mobility status increases.
    Number of planetary guns = number_of_sectors * average_mobility * 0.001
  The formulas for calculating hit probability and damage are the same as for
the "fire" command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  fire, tactical, mobilize

& delete

{{NAME}}
  delete [0] -- Mark dispatches for deletion

{{SYNTAX}}
  read dispatch <#>  -- Marks displatch # for deletion

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The 'delete' command is used to mark dispatches for deletion. You may view
your displatches with the 'read' command. Once dispatches are marked, you may
get rid of all of them with the 'purge' command.
  Using the 'delete' command on an already marked message will unmark it.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  purge, read

& deploy

{{NAME}}
  deploy [variable] -- Move military from one sector to another

{{SYNTAX}}
  deploy <origin sector x, y> <direction list> <number of troops>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to move troops from one sector to an adjacent sector. The
player enters or originating sector, target sector, and the amount of troops to
move. If a destination sector is occupied by aliens, the combat strengths of the
player (attacker) and alien (defender) are computed. See 'combat' for details.
  If number of troops argument is not given, all troops in the original sector
will be moved. If a negative troops is specified, then all troops, except for
the amount specified, will move.
  The direction orders the group to move in one of 8 compass directions:
    7   8   9
     \  |  /
      \ | /
   4 -- . -- 6
      / | \
     /  |  \
    1   2   3
  The troops will continue to move as long as a valid move is available.
Movement stops when an illegal move, lost/draw combat; or lack of action points
occurs. For example, 'move 10,4 6698 -2' will leave two people behind in sector
10,4 move the rest to 11,4 leave 2, move the rest to 12,4, leave 2, move the
rest to 11,3 leave 2, finish the move to 11,2. This would cost 4 APs.
  This command cannot be used on planets that have been enslaved to another
player. Moving civilians uses up more action points than moving troops.

  +---------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
  | APs                 | 1 |  2 |   3 |    4 |    5 |   6 |    7 |    8 |
  +---------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
  | Civilians    Min    | 1 |  2 |   7 |   20 |   54 | 148 |  403 | 1096 |
  |              Max    | * |  6 |  19 |   53 |  147 | 402 | 1095 |      |
  +---------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
  | Military     Min    | 1 |  9 |  99 |  999 | 9999 |     |      |      |
  |              Max    | 8 | 98 | 998 | 9998 |      |     |      |      |
  +---------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
    * NOTE: Moving max civilians cost only 1 AP

  For attacks (against alien occupied positions) add 1 to the action point cost.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  combat, enslave, move

& detonate

{{NAME}}
  detonate [0] -- Force a mine to explode

{{SYNTAX}}
  detonated <mine>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Normally, a mine is set to detonate at the prearranged trigger radius using
the 'order' command. However, players may find it useful to order their space
mines to explode upon request, between updates. This command is used to do this.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  order

& disarm

{{NAME}}
  disarm [0] -- Convert military into civilians

{{SYNTAX}}
  disarm <sector> [<troops>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This is used to turn troops back into civilians. All weapons are lost (there
is no recovery of destruct used to arm troops).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  arm, military

& dismount

{{NAME}}
  mount [0] -- Mount a crystal into a ship's hyperdrive
  dismount [0] -- Dismount a crystal from the hyperdrive

{{SYNTAX}}
  mount <ship>
  dismount <ship>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Normally, a ship required a waiting period before a hyperspace jump can be
executed. This requires powering up the drive for some period of time. However,
the charge-up time can be bypassed if a player has a crystal mounted. The effect
of a crystal also allows the ship to jump farther and more fuel efficiently than
for a ship without a crystal mounted.
  Laser guns also requires mounted crystal in ship.
  In order to mount a crystal, the player can change scope to the ship which is
to have a crystal mounted, or specify the ship's number. This ship must have a
crystal on board. A crystal can be dismounted using the 'dismount' command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  crystal

& dissolve

{{NAME}}
  disoolve -- Resign your forces from play in the game.

{{SYNTAX}}
  dissolve <password>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  A player can resign from the game by issuing a dissolve command. All ships,
sectors, resources, destruct, etc. are permanently eliminated from the game.
Dissolved players also do not appear on power reports.
  You must specify your password to dissolve. Make sure you want to do this
before using it, as all is immediately lost!

{{SEE ALSO}}
  power

& distance

{{NAME}}
  distance [0] -- Get the distance between two object

{{SYNTAX}}
  distance <from> <to>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Players can use this command to obatin the distances between any pair of
stars/planets/ships.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  dist #123 #456            Gives you distance between ships #123 and 456

  distance /Sol/Earth /Sol  Gives the distance between the start and the planet

  distance .Earth #456      Gives the distance between the planet and the ship
                            (from planet scope).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  fuel

& dock

{{NAME}}
  dock [0] -- Land a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  dock <#shipnumber> <#to shipnumber>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command docks two own ships together. The two ships in question must be
closer than the minimum landing distance (10).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  undock

& dump

{{NAME}}
  dump [0] -- Give another player your exploration data

{{SYNTAX}}
  dump <race> [list of stars]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This allows a player to give another player (usually a trusted ally) all of
your exploration data. This information is permanently recorded in the receiving
player's exploration list.
  If a list of stars is given only those in the list will be dumped.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  dump 12 /Sol /Regulus /Taurus  Transfers information of those start systems

{{SEE ALSO}}
  explore

& emote

{{NAME}}
  emote [0] -- Tell all players logged in what you are thinking using thrid
               person.

{{SYNTAX}}
  emote <message>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is like broadcast. Text following the emote command is sent to
each player currently logged in, unless they are GAGed (see the toggle command).

{{EXAMPLE}}
  Player named Skywalker emotes: 'emote just loves Dreadnaughts.'
  And every player logged in and ungaged receives message:
    'Skywalker just loves Dreadnaughts.'

{{SEE ALSO}}
  ocmmunications, broadcast, channel

& enslave

{{NAME}}
  enslave [1] -- Enslave a world

{{SYNTAX}}
  enslave <shipnumber>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to convert entire planets to a condition of slavery. When
invoked the ship specified must be an Orbital Assault Platform, which is the
only ship type sufficiently impressive to convince the planetary population of
the futility of resistance. The platform must be orbiting the planet to be
enslaved.
  To commence a proper enslavement, the forces bearing (the platform itself plus
the other ships which might be orbiting the planet) against the planet must be
more than twice the defending strength (weapons under the control of the
inhabitants plust the weapons on board any ships they own in orbit around the
planet). The enslaving player must have a garrison (at least one population) on
the planet.
  The enslaving player is not told how much strength the other players might
have, but he is told whether the planet was enslaved or not. Telegram messages
are sent to any players affected by the command.
  To keep the planet the enslaving player must maintain a garrison of at least
0.1% of the total population on the planet. (The garrison need not be that large
to initiate slavery, but must be that large to maintain it.) If the garrison
falls below this threshold, and the OAP is no longer in orbit around the planet,
a revolution is immediate and devestating: all sectors belonging to the former
slave holder are destroyed in the inhabitants' fury of revolution. If the OAP is
still there, there is a chance (50%) that a revolution will not occur, and some
occupying sectors may not be destroyed (without it overhead, they will be).
Other random sectors will be damaged as well in the fight.
  When a planet is under enslavement, everything produced there will be credited
to the slave-holding player's stockpiles. Races enslaved on a planet can still
survey, map, and otherwise observe things happening there (there is an active
resistance).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  survey, map

& examine

{{NAME}}
  examine [0] -- Look at a ship/object

{{SYNTAX}}
  examine <#shipnum>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Examine gives the user a short paragraph-summary description of a ship or
object and how it can be used. This command can be applied to any ship or object
in a system where a player has equipment (ships, objects, or a colonized
planet).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  build

& explore

{{NAME}}
  explore [0] -- Global survey of explored worlds

{{SYNTAX}}
  explore <where>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command gives a brief census of all stars and worlds the player currently
occupies, or has occupied, and those which exploration data other races has
given (using dump command).
  More detailed information about stars/planets can be found using the 'survey'
command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  survey, dump

& factories

{{NAME}}
  factories [0] -- Look at what your factories are making

{{SYNTAX}}
  factories

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command outputs a table from whihc you can see all of your factories in
the current scope are producing. All data on the table are stats of the ship the
factory will produce, and NOT the stats of the factory itself (except the
"Damage" and "#" columns).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  report, build, modify

& fire

{{NAME}}
  fire [1] -- Shoot a ship at another ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  fire <from> <to> [<strength>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The fire commands allow players to attach each others ships/planets with
available guns. Fire attempts to use stockpiled destructive capacity from one
place, to give damage to another.
  The maximum number of guns for a ship is proportional to the maximum number of
guns which the ship was originally constructed with, and the damage level of the
ship. As the ship accumulates more damage the number of guns available
decreases.
  Ship-to-ship combact is the 'essence' of the Galactic Bloodshed combat system.
The program will compute the 'hit probability'. This designates the chances that
a particular gun will actually hit the target ship with the potential of doing
damage to it. When a player designates a 'salvo' of so many guns, each gun is
evaluated for hit/mass, the sum of all hits is then used to determine the
results of the salvo.
  If a ship is firing on another ship, and no strength is given, the salvo
strength specified by the player (see 'order salvo <strength>') is used.
  The hit probability depnds on several factors:
    1) The technology of firing ship. The higher the technology, the more
       accurate the firing vessels shots are.
    2) The size of the target vessel. Larger targets are easier to hit.
    3) The speed of the firing and target ships. It is assumed that the
       motions of the ships can affect the chances of hitting the target.
    4) Whether or not 'evasive maneuvers' have been ordered for the ship in
       question.
  The hit probability can be found from the 'tactical' display.
  Note, that a ship must actually be 'going somewhere' (plotted move in 'order')
for the evasive and speed factors to be taken into effect (otherwise they are
set to zero).
  After the hit probability is determined each firing gun is evaluated for
hit/miss. Each hit is then checked to for penetration. The probability of a hit
penetrating depnds on the ship's armor. The armor effectiveness factor depends
on the technology of both the firing and the target ship.
  Bigger ships (represented by body) can absorb more hits less ensuing damage
than little ships. Also notice that smaller ships, although harder to hit, are
easier to damage *when* hit.
  Special rule: Every 5 hits in a salvo against a target reduces its armor value
for that attack by 1.
  After evaluating for structure damage, the program then checks for 'critical
hits'. EACH hit is evaluated, whether or not any real structural damage has
occured on the target vessel. The chances of a critical hit depends on the size
of the target ship. Smaller ships are more likely to suffer damage from critical
hits than big ships. A random amount of damage between 1 and 100% is assessed
for each critical hit, in additiona to the normal structural damage.

Defensive and Offensive Combat Options
  A player may set up his own defense/response networks. Specifically, in the
'order' command, a player may designate his ships to retaliate (default) if they
are attacked. Whenever you fire at a ship, if you have done any damage to his
ship, you ship will return fire immediately, thereby damaging the attacker. The
retaliate option can be toggled on and off, depending on the player's
intentions. A player may also designate his ships to defend other ships, so that
is you ship is attacked and damaged, all other ships designated to 'protect' the
ship will fire back at the attacking vessel.
  Ships may also be designated to be on 'planetary defense' alert. If the planet
is attacked, all ships defending will retaliate against the intruder.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  bombard, defend, tactical, order

& fleet

{{NAME}}
  fleet [0] -- Shows your race's fleets

{{SYNTAX}}
  fleet

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command shows your race's current fleets, which governor is the current
admiral of that fleet, what the fleet name is, and which ships are attached to
that fleet.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  fleets

& fuel

{{NAME}}
  fuel [0] -- Show how much fuel ordered travel needs

{{SYNTAX}}
  fuel <#ship> <destination>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The fuel command is used to obtain information about how much fuel traveling
to a destination consumes. Command also gives you the time (in segments) how
long the trip will take.
  Ship must either have a destination in its orders or you can give destination
with command. If you give destination the command will show the time and fuel
needed to that destination but orders of the ship are left unchanged.
  The amount of fuel consumed depends from the speed of the ship. Higher speeds
use more fuel to cover the same distance. Relative amount of fuel used with
different speeds is:
    speed    multiplier
      1          1.0
      2          1.4
      3          1.7
      4          2.0
      5          2.2
      6          2.4
      7          2.6
      8          2.8
      9          3.0
  The amount of fuel consumed depends also from the mass of the ship. Heavy
ships use more fuel than light ships.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  distance

& give

{{NAME}}
  give [3] -- Give a mutual ally a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  give <racE> <ship>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  You can give another player a ship if you are both mutuall allied. The ship
becomes immediately under the new player's control. Ship must be without crew
and military. Spore pods cannot have their ownership changed.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  declare, relation

& governors

{{NAME}}
  governors [0] -- Information about a race's governors

{{SYNTAX}}
  governors
  governors <governor #> password <new password>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The first of the "governors command will list all the governors currently
appointed. Information given includes governor name, password (if you are the
race leader), time online, and last login date.
  The second form of the command is used to change a governor's password. The
race leader can change the password of any of the governors, while governors
can only change their own password.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  appoint, grant, name, revoke, promote

& grant

{{NAME}}
  grant [0] -- Give a governor something

{{SYNTAX}}
  grant <governor #> <what> [amount]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used by the race leader to give a governor objects in the
game. Things that can be "grant"ed include:
    STARS - Granting a star gives the governor the ownership of all population
            in the system. Anything built, produced, etc. in the system will
            belong to the governor and can be used as the governor wishes.
            Syntax: "grant <governor #> star /<Star>"
    SHIPS - This will give the governor complete control over the ship(s).
            Any new systems the ship discovers, or any ships it takes over will
            also belong to the governor. Any number of ships can be used with
            the command.
            Syntax: "grant <governor #> shipnumber <#shipnumber> ..."
    MONEY - Gives the governor money to be put in the treasury. Each governor
            has a separate treasury. Money is used automatically in update for
            ship upkeep, and can be used for insurgencies.
            Syntax: "grant <governor #> money <amount>"
  To take any of these items back from the governor, the <governor #> can be
specified as "0".

{{SEE ALSO}}
  appoint, governors, revoke

& highlight

{{NAME}}
  highligh [0] -- Highlight given race's ships on map

{{SYNTAX}}
  highlight <race>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  A player can specify which race he/she wishes to highlight. Given race's ships
will be easier to note from a map. It is initially set to the player.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  map, identify

& identify

{{NAME}}
  identify [0] -- Gives you the race name given the race's number

{{SYNTAX}}
  identify <race # to identify>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command can be used when you know a race's number (such as information
you find on "tactical", etc.) and you want to look up the race's name. "whois"
does the same thing.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  who, whois

& index

{{CONCEPT}}
  commands -- List of server (game) commands

    {{allocate}}   -- Transfer global action points to a star system
    {{analysis}}   -- Provide sector report for planet
    {{announce}}   -- Send message to other races in a star system
    {{appoint}}    -- Initialize governor position and assign a password
    {{arm}}        -- Convert civilian population to military units
    {{assault}}    -- Attempt a capture of an enemy ship in space
    {{autoreport}} -- Toggle automatic update reports from a planet
    {{bid}}        -- List market items and make a bid
    {{block}}      -- Display list of power blocks
    {{bombard}}    -- Fire ship's weapons at planet
    {{broadcast}}  -- Send a message to all players logged in
    {{bug}}        -- Send deity a bug report
    {{build}}      -- Construct a ship
    {{capital}}    -- Designate the new seat of governemnt
    {{capture}}    -- Order population to attempt to seize an alien ship
                      landed in the same sector
    {{center}}     -- Change global map center point in another system
    {{cew}}        -- Fire confined energy weapons
    {{colonies}}   -- List colonies
    {{cs}}         -- Change scope
    {{declare}}    -- State relations with other player
    {{defend}}     -- Shoot a planet at a ship
    {{deploy}}     -- Move military from one sector to another
    {{detonate}}   -- Force a mine to explode
    {{disarm}}     -- Convert military into civilians
    {{dismount}}   -- Remove a crystal from a ship's hyperdrive
    {{dissolve}}   -- Resign your forces from play in the game
    {{distance}}   -- Get the distance between two objects
    {{dock}}       -- Dock two ships together
    {{dump}}       -- Give another player your exploration data
    {{emote}}      -- Send message to all players logged in using third person
    {{enslave}}    -- Enslave a world
    {{examine}}    -- Look at ship/object
    {{explore}}    -- Global survey of explored worlds
    {{factories}}  -- Look at what your factories are making
    {{fire}}       -- Shoot a ship to another ship
    {{fleet}}      -- Shows your race's fleets
    {{fuel}}       -- Show how much fuel and time ordered travel needs
    {{give}}       -- Give a mutual ally a ship
    {{governors}}  -- Information about race's governors
    {{grant}}      -- Give a governor something
    {{help}}       -- Ask more information
    {{highlight}}  -- Highlight any race's ships in map
    {{identify}}   -- Show you the race name given the race's number
    {{insurgency}} -- Try to force enemy population into civil revolt
    {{invite}}     -- Invite another race to join your block
    {{jettison}}   -- Unload commodities from a ship into space
    {{land}}       -- Land a ship
    {{launch}}     -- Launch a ship
    {{load}}       -- Load commodities to a ship
    {{make}}       -- Command a factory to make specific ship type
    {{map}}        -- Show a map
    {{mobilize}}   -- Increase military mobilization in sectors
    {{modify}}     -- Modify attributes of a ship
    {{motto}}      -- Set a motto for an alliance block
    {{mount}}      -- Mount a crystal into a ship's hyperdrive
    {{move}}       -- Move civilians from sector to another
    {{name}}       -- Rename an object
    {{orbit}}      -- Graphic representation of object in current scope
    {{order}}      -- Give ship standing orders
    {{page}}       -- Tell another player that you are looking for them
    {{pay}}        -- Pay money to another player
    {{personal}}   -- Leave a personal message in your profile
    {{pledge}}     -- say 'yes' to an invitation to join a block
    {{post}}       -- Write a message to Galactic News
    {{power}}      -- List empires and their approximate influences
    {{production}} -- Show latest planet production statistics
    {{prance}}     -- Prance happily around
    {{profile}}    -- Racial profile
    {{promote}}    -- Promote your governor
    {{quit}}       -- Disconnect from the server
    {{read}}       -- Read message sent to you or read Galactic News
    {{relation}}   -- State relations
    {{repair}}     -- Repair wasteland sectors
    {{report}}     -- Navigational ship report
    {{revoke}}     -- Remove governor's powers
    {{route}}      -- Set and provide information about shipping routes
    {{schedule}}   -- Give player information about update schedule
    {{scrap}}      -- Junk a ship
    {{sell}}       -- Put a lot of commodities up for sale in the market
    {{send}}       -- Send messages to other players
    {{ship}}       -- Ship report
    {{stars}}      -- Obtain information of star positions
    {{stats}}      -- Report ship characteristics
    {{status}}     -- Status report for all colonies
    {{stock}}      -- Give stockpile report on ships
    {{survey}}     -- More detailed survey of star/planet/sector
    {{tactical}}   -- Provide a report on ship's ability to do military
                      maneuvers
    {{tax}}        -- Set the tax rate of a planet
    {{technology}} -- Invest money into tech production
    {{think}}      -- Send message to every governor of your race
    {{time}}       -- Show current time and other stats
    {{toggle}}     -- Turn on/off some options
    {{toxicity}}   -- Set threshold for building toxic waste canister
    {{transfer}}   -- Transfer supplies to alien stockpiles
    {{treasury}}   -- Show your financial situation
    {{undock}}     -- Undock a ship
    {{unpledge}}   -- Leave block
    {{unload}}     -- Unload commodities from your ship
    {{uninvite}}   -- Kick a race out of your block
    {{upgrade}}    -- Upgrade attributes of a ship
    {{victory}}    -- Describe current standings of players
    {{vote}}       -- Vote on a Galactic Bloodshed issue
    {{walk}}       -- Move AFV from sector to another
    {{weapons}}    -- Show an armament status of a ship
    {{who}}        -- Describe who is currently connected to a race
    {{whois}}      -- Give the race name given the race's number
    {{zoom}}       -- Declare zoom values

& insurgency

{{NAME}}
  insurgency [10] -- Try to force enemy population into civil revolt

{{SYNTAX}}
  insurgency <victim> <funds>  Spend a given amount of founds to persuade
                               the population of the victim to throw a bloody
                               little revolt.

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The insurgency command is used to persuade the population of a planet, through
financial means, that they have had enough of their bloody dictator and should
rise in revolt. This command will only work at planet scope. You must have
population in that planet's system, before you can attempt an insurgency. The
probability of a successful insurgency depends on the following things:
    Victim's population in system
    Victim's population in target planet
    Victim's tax rate in traget planet
    Your population in system
    Amount of money you spend
  It is much wiser to try several times with smaller amount of money, than try
one huge investment. Prepare yourself to spend each try about as much money as
victim's popluation on target planet. If the attempt fails, some of the money
spend on it goes to victim and the rest of it is lost permanently. If the
attempt succeeds, each individual sector occupied by the player is evalauted for
revolt. Troops on sector will reduce chance of revolt. So you can defend your
important sectors by arming civilians on those sectors. If the sector revolts,
all troops are killed, and the instigating player gains control of the sector.

NOTE: Only sectors that are compatible to you can revolt.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  money, tax treasury

& invite

{{NAME}}
  invite [0]   -- Invite another race to joing your block
  uninvite [0] -- Kick a race out of your block
  pledge [0]   -- Say yes to an invitation to join a block
  unpledge [0] -- Leave a block

{{SYNTAX}}
  invite <race>
  uninvite <race>
  pledge <race>
  <unpledge <race>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Each race may lead one alliance block. In order to get people into the group
you must you the 'invite <race>' command to request membership. The other player
may join the alliance block by using 'pledge <leader race>'. A race may quit by
doing 'unpledge <leader race>', or blackball another for his group by doing
'uninvite <race>'. Alliance blocks do not force alliances among it's members. In
fact, it is solely used for political purposes.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  block, power, relation

& jettison

{{NAME}}
  jettison [0] -- Unload commodities from a ship into space

{{SYNTAX}}
  jettison <#shipnum> <commodity> <amount>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The jettison command is used to eject unwanted cargo from ships. The
permissable commodities are d, c, m, r, f and x meaning destruct, crew, military
resource, fuel and crystal. If <amount> is omitted or zero, all of the commodity
is jettisoned. Jettison can only be used on ship in space; landed ships cannot
jettison. Jettisoned cargo is lost forever.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  load

& land

{{NAME}}
  land [1] -- Land a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  land <#shipnum | ship types> [<x, y> | #<shipnum>]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command lands ships on planets or one some types of ships. To do so the
ship must be closer than 45 distance units away from the planet or ship it is
trying to land on.
  This maneuver costs an amount of fuel proportional to the mass of the ship
(and the gravitational field of the planet below if landing on a planet). When
landing on a planet, if the ship does not have enough fuel it will either crash
or refuse to try landing. Crashing will give damage to the planet in proportion
to the mass of the ship, the gravitational field of the planet, and the amount
of destructive capacity the ship happs to be carrying. If ship is damaged, it
got also chance (equal to damage %) to crash when it is trying to land.
  Ships can be transported by other ships provided hanger space is available.
The hanger space is the total size of ships which can be carried. The mothership
and the ships it is carrying move as one unit. Ships may be debarked by using
the 'launch' command. You can see which ships are landed on your motherships by
changing scope to the motherships and using report/stock. Landing in hanger will
not cost actionpoints.
  If a mothership is destroyed for any reason, all loaded ships are also
eliminated. If a ship gets captured, all ships on board are also captured.
  Land based ships (a, P, G for example) can only be loaded if the mothership is
landed on the same planet and occupied the same sector. A ship may not be loaded
if it is 'on' (see order) and, as cargo, cannot be turned on.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  dock, launch, undock, profile, colony

& launch

{{NAME}}
  launch [0] -- Launch a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  launch <#shipnum>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command attempts to launch ships that are landed on planets. To do so a
ship must have an amount of fuel proportional to the gravitational field of the
planet and the mass of the ship. If the ship does not have enough fuel, it will
not be able to launch. This ship must not be irradiated.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  undock, land, dock

& list
  __{{COMBAT}}__ -
    assault        bombard        capture        cew
    defend         enslave        fire

  __{{COMMUNICATIONS}}__ -
    announce       broadcast      bug            channel
    delete         emote          highlight      page
    post           purge          read           send
    think

  __{{GOVERNMENT}}__ -
    allocate       capital        dissolve       move
    repair         route          technology     toxicity
    vote

  __{{INFORMATION}}__ -
    analysis       autoreport     colonies       distance
    dump           examine        explore        fuel
    governors      identify       map            motto
    name           orbit          personal       power
    production     profile        schedule       ship
    stars          status         survey         techlevel
    victory        who            whois

  __{{MILITARY}}__ -
    arm            deploy         disarm         mobilize

  __{{MONETARY}}__ -
    bid            insurgency     pay            sell
    tax            transfer       treasury

  __{{RELATIONS}}__ -
    appoint        block          declare        give
    grant          invite         pledge         promote
    relation       revoke         uninvite       unpledge

  __{{SERVER}}__ -
    center         cs             quit           time
    toggle         zoom

  __{{SHIPS}}__ -
    build          detonate       dismount       dock
    factories      fleet          jettison       land
    launch         load           make           modify
    mount          order          report         scrap
    stats          stock          tactical       undock
    unload         upgrade        walk           weapons

& load

{{NAME}}
  load [0] -- Load/unload commodities to/from a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  load <#shipnum> <commodity> <amount>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The load command is used for the resupplying of ships, and the disembarking of
colonies. If no arguments are specified, the program will prompte the user for:
    #shipnum    -- What ship to load from/to
    d|c|r|f|x|m -- Specify destruction, crew, resources, fuel, military or
                   crystals to load/unload. Destruction, resources and fuel are
                   taken from that user's stockpiles, while people are taken
                   from the sector the ship is landed on. If the ship is docked
                   with another ship and not a planet, the transfers will be
                   direct.
    amount      -- The amount to load (if negative, the amount will be
                   subtracted). This must be within certain bounds: The maximum
                   cargo capacity of each ship, unless one or both of the ships
                   are shuttles. Shuttles are unique in that their design allows
                   cargo to be strapped to their hull, and thus they can
                   actually hold more cargo than the maximum. An overloaded
                   shuttle cannot, however, take off or land until it jettisons
                   its excess. If no amount argument is specified, the maximum
                   available of the commodity will be loaded on board.
  If the ship is neither landed at a planet nor docked with another vessel, the
player can't load/unload its cargo/passengers.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  unload, jettison

& make

{{NAME}}
  make [0] -- This commands a factory to make a specific ship type

{{SYNTAX}}
  make <ship type>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  In order to build ships, a factory must be programmed to produce the desired
type of ship. For example, if a factory is to produce explorers, the player must
issue the command 'make e'. The make with a ship argument can only be issued to
offline factories. Once online, the ship design is set. If no argument is
specified, the command will list the characteristics of the ship type being
produced. These characteristics can be altered via the 'modify' command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  modify, build

& map

{{NAME}}
  map [0] -- Cartesian coordinate map of planet's surface

{{SYNTAX}}
  map <path>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The map command gives a sector map of the planet in [path]. If [path] is not a
planet, map will instead run orbit (see orbit) with lastx,lasty both equal to
0,0 or starmap of whole galaxy. A player cannot map a planet that has not yet
been explored. These are the different tyles of terrain:
    '*' -- Unexplored wilderness or undeveloped land
    '^' -- Mountainous area (more resources, less fertility)
    '.' -- Area containing water (or other liquid)
    '#' -- Area covered with ice
    '~' -- Gas (such as might be found on a gas giant planet)
    '"' -- Forest
    '-' -- Desert
    '%' -- Wasteland (uninhabitable)
    ' ' -- (Under certain circumstances the sector may be blank)
    'o' -- A steel (or whatever) plated sector, much like the planet Trantor
           (from Asimov's _Foundation_), 100% efficiency.
  In addition are the designations that map gives the player:
    Areas owned by your race use 'reverse background' (highlighted) so you can
    see the terrain occupied as well. If you terminal type does not work with
    the reverse background, use 'toggle inverse' to toggle it off.

    '?' -- Area owned by another player where ? is the on's digit of the
           player's number.
    'A' -- There is allied troops in sector.
    'N' -- There is neutral troops.
    'X' -- There is enemy troops.
    'x' -- Sector is containing crystals.
    '<sign or ship>' -- A ship of that type is landed on the sector

    You can use the 'aliens' option to toggle the way alien sectors are
    displayed. The default option is that aliens have their full number
    printed out. For example player 9 will have a '9' in each sector occupied.
    However player 10 will have the alternate digits '1' and '0' displayed. The
    player may change it so only the one's digit of the number is displayed.
    Then player 10 will have a '0' in each sector occupied.

    Use the 'geography' option to toggle whether or not aliens are displayed at
    all. The default value is that they are displayed.

------------------- THE PLANETS -------------------
  There are four basic types of planets.

  Earth-type

        00000000001111111111222222222233333333
        01234567890123456789012345678901234567
      1 ######################################
      2 ############..*...#***##....#####*#.##
      3 ..#*^*#*.....*.*^^^****#*******#**.*..
      4 ..*^**.*.......*****.*************.*..
      5 ..*..*.......**....*..**^^^^******.*..
      6 ......))......*----****..***.***^**.*.
      7 .....^))).....*---**^**...*....**^^...
      8 .....^)*........***^*........*...*..*.
      9 ......^*.........**^*..........**^*...
     10 #..#####...####...##....####...##.*##.
     11 ######################################
             Sample Earth-type planet

    Continents are generated randomly by the game, and approximate real growth
    of islands by geologic processes. On the average, sectors closer to water
    have greater fertility than sectors farther aware, which have greater
    resource deposits. On the norht and south poles of the planet lies ice,
    prime real estate for certain races.

  Gas Giant type

    This type of planet is mostly a large ball of gas. They do not have many
    resources but they are useful; for instance any ship orbiting a gas giant
    can gain fuel by 'skimming' it's surface for hydrogen (provided its race
    has developed hydrogen fusion for fuel.)

        000000000011111111112222222222333333333344444444445
        012345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890
      1 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~
      2 ~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
      3 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~........~~~~~~~~~~~~
      4 ...................................................
      5 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.................~~~~~~~~~
      6 ~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
      7 ~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~
      8 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
      9 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..............~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     10 ...................................................
     11 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~...............~~~~~~~~~~
     12 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~
                      Sample gas giant planet

    Notice the narrow bands streaked across the surface; this represents bands
    of weather across the face of the planet.

  Airless, Asteroidal, and Iceball Types

    These planets are too small to hold an atmosphere, or have had it stripped
    off by natural or artficial disaseter. They consist of land mountainous
    and/or ice sectors, with high resource deposits and comparitvely low
    fertility. Both types contain large craters in them from meteorite impacts,
    while asteroidal bodies often appear in unusal shapes (i.e. not exactly
    square). If the temperature is sufficiently low, ice may cover the surface.
    This is an 'iceball' type planet.

        00000000001111111111222                  000
        01234567890123456789012                  012
      1 ^#####^^#########^^####                1 *^^
      2 ^^^^^*^^^^^^^*^^^^^^^^^                2 ^*^
      3 ^^^*^^^^^^^^***^^*^^^^^          Sample Asteroid type
      4 *^^^^*****^^^*^^^^^^^**
      5 **^^***^***^^^*^^^*^**^                  000000
      6 *^^*^******^^^^^^^^^^**                  012345
      7 *^^^^^****^^*^^^^^*^^^*                1 ^##^##
      8 ^^*^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^                2 ^#^###
      9 ###########^^######^###                3 ##^###
         Sample Airless type             Sample Iceball type

  Desert and Forest Types

    Arakis (Dune) and Endor are two examples of desert and forest types
    respectively. Desert planets are high in resource content and are mostly
    desert sectors with a few mountain sectors. Forest planets are high in
    fertility and are made up of mostly forest sectors with some scattered water
    sectors.

        0000000000111111111122
        0123456789012345678901
      1 ------------*****^----             000000000011111
      2 -------------****^----             012345678901234
      3 --------------***^----           1 ))..)))))))))))
      4 -^-------------------*           2 )))..))))))))))
      5 -*-------------------*           3 ))).).).)))))))
      6 **-------------------*           4 ))))))).)))))))
      7 **-------------------*           5 ))))).).)))))))
         Sample Desert type              Sample Forest type

  Water Types

    Aquatic planets are for those races that like to swim. They are made of
    mostly water with some ice at the poles and a few scattered islands.

        00000000001111111111
        01234567890123456789
      1 ..#..#.......^#.####
      2 ....................
      3 .^^.................
      4 ..^.........^^.....^
      5 ^..................^
      6 ^##.####..##.#####^#
         Sample Water type

{{SEE ALSO}}
  orbit, cs, scope

& mobilize

{{NAME}}
  mobilize [1] -- Increase military mobilization in sectors

{{SYNTAX}}
  mobilize <new quota>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command sets quotas for mobilization in sectors, for the production of
"destructive capacity" which represented weapons in GB.
  The "mobilization" of a sector represents its miliatry readiness; the greater
the percentage (up to 100), the higher the mobilization. Sectors that are
mobilized produce quantities of destructive capacity according to the degree of
mobilization and the amount of resource deposits in the sector.
  This command only sets a quota, it does not do any actual work. Mobilization
will be built up by the citizenry a small amount at a time as the population
works to organize things and set up factories and shelters and so forth. Each
mobilization point on each sector costs 0.1 resource points to produce. This
amount is deducted from the resource points available on the planet.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  defend, arm, commodities

& modify

{{NAME}}
  modify [0] -- Modify attributes of a ship being designed at a factory.

{{SYNTAX}}
  modify <attribute> <value>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Once a ship design has been specified for a factory, you may alter the design
attributes to suit your needs. Each attribute is compared to the 'standard'
design and a cost for producing the ship is evaluated based on these attributes.
Specifically, the following attributes may be altered:
    armor
    size
    crew
    fuel
    cargo
    destruct
    speed
    hyperdrive
along with the special modification commands below.
  The modify command reports the current cost of producing the ship type at the
factory.
  A base mass is also computed, the mass of the ship with nothing loaded on
board. Each point of armor has a mass of 1 while each gun and point of size has
a mass of 1/10.
  Special systems:
         laser - A player can mount/dismount combat lasers by using
                 'modify laser'.
          CEWs - A player can modify 'confined energy weapon' parameters. A CEW
                 is assumed to be active if it has strength. To specify a CEW
                 strength do 'mod cew strength <strength>'. To modify the CEW
                 range do 'mod cew range <range>'.
       primary - A player may modify the primary gun caliber and strength with
                 'mod primary strength <strength>' and
                 'mod primary caliber <light|medium|heavy>'. A particular ship
                 type has a limit to the maximum gun caliber.
     secondary - Same as for primary except the word 'secondar' is used. Some
                 ships may not have seconadry gun systems.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  make, build, lasers, cew

& motto

{{NAME}}
  motto [0] -- Set a motto for an alliance block

{{SYNTAX}}
  motto <motto>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Players may give the alliance block they control a motto which will show up on
individual block reports. This is strictly for entertainment/communications and
has no effect on the play of the game.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  blocks

& mount

{{NAME}}
  mount [0] -- Mount a crystal into a ship's hyperdrive.
  dismount [0] -- Dismount a crystal from the hyperdrive.

{{SYNTAX}}
  mount <ship>
  dismount <ship>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Normally, a ship requires a waiting period before a hyperspace jump can be
executed. This requires powering up the drive for some period of time. However,
the charge-up time can be bypassed if a player has a crystal mounted. The effect
of a crystal also allows the ship to jump farther and more fuel efficiently than
for a shipw without a crystal mounted.
  Laser guns also require a mounted crystal in the ship.
  In order to mount a crystal, the plyer can change scope to the ship which is
to have a crystal mounted, or specify the ship's number. The ship must have a
crystal on board. A crystal can be dismounted using the 'dismount' command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  crystal, order

& move

{{NAME}}
  move [variable] -- Move civilians from one sector to another.

{{SYNTAX}}
  move <origin sector x,y> <direction list> <number of population>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to move population from one sector to an adjacent sector.
The player enters the origination sector, target sector, and the amount of
population to move. If a destination sector is occupied by aliens, the combat
strengths of the player (attacker) and alien (defender) are computed. The
assault is evaluation and casualties are removed from each sector. See 'combat'
for more details.
  If no population argument is given, all population in the original sector will
be moved. If a negative population is specified, the all population, except for
the amount specified, will move.
  The direction orders the group to move in one of 8 compass directions:
    7   8   9
     \  |  /
      \ | /
   4 -- . -- 6
      / | \
     /  |  \
    1   2   3
  The population will continue to move as long as a valid move is available.
Movement stops when an illegal move, lost/draw combat, or lack of action points
occurs. For example, 'move 10,4 6698 -2' will leave two people behind in sector
10,4 move the rest to 11,4, leave 2, move the rest to 12,4, leave 2, move the
rest to 11,3, leave 2, finish the move to 11,2. This move can be executed until
the availability of action points (see below).
  This command cannot be used on planets that have been enslaved to another
race.
  Moving civilians uses up more action points than moving troops.
    +-----------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
    | AP's                  | 1 |  2 |  3  |   4  |   5  |  6  |   7  |   8  |
    +-----------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
    | Civilians     Min     | 1 |  3 |   7 |   20 |   54 | 148 |  403 | 1096 |
    |               Max     | * |  6 |  19 |   53 |  147 | 402 | 1095 |      |
    +-----------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
    | Military      Min     | 1 |  9 |  99 |  999 | 9999 |     |      |      |
    |               Max     | 8 | 98 | 998 | 9998 |    - |     |      |      |
    +-----------------------+---+----+-----+------+------+-----+------+------+
      * NOTE: Moving minsex cost only 1 ap.
  For attacks (against alien occupied positions add 1 to the action point cost.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  combat, enslave, deploy

& name

{{NAME}}
  name [8] -- Rename an object (ship, star, planet, your race)

{{SYNTAX}}
  name <what> <name>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  In order to rename a ship, cs to the ship, then do 'name ship <name>'. To
name a fleet, cs to a ship in the fleet then 'name fleet <name>'. You can also
rename your race with 'name race <name>', or your own governor name with
'name governor <name>'. You must own ships to rename them.
  To name a class of ships being produced by a factory, you use
'name class <name>'. The factory must be off-line for this to work.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  cs, report, weapons

& orbit

{{NAME}}
  orbit [0] -- Graphic representation of objects in current scope

{{SYNTAX}}
  orbit <[-n] [-S] [-p] [-s] [-ship/planet number]> <path>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Orbit gives a visual map of all stars, planets, and ships in the scope of
path or the current scope if none is specified. You cannot map an area that has
not been visited by one of your ships.
  If path is the root, orbit will show all the stars in the game, and all ships
travelling in interstellar space that belong to the player.
  If path is a star, orbit will display the solar system there whit its star in
the center and orbiting planets around it, plus all ships that are the player's
(or that can be detected).
  If path is a planet orbit will display that plaent and orbiting ships.
  If path is in the form #shipnum orbit will display a map of whichever system
or planet the ship is at.
  If no path is specified, the current scope is used, and display will be
centered around the current lastx,lasty coordinates. These coordinates represent
the x,y location of the last scope the player was in. For instance, if a player
types the following:
    [xx] / >cs #5/..
    [yy] / Sol / Sol-III >orbit
  The orbit display will be centered around the location of ship #5.
  When no path is specified, the zoom factor comes into play as well. Display
will appear larger or smaller according to the zoom factor (1.0 being normal).
If there is a specified path argument to orbit, zoom and last coordinates are
not dealt with. (It is as if they are 0,0 and 1.0, respectively.)

{{OPTIONS}}
  When invoking orbit the options given (except for -(number)) can be either in
the form "-pSs" or spread out as in "-p -S -s -3".
           -p : If this option is set, orbit will not display planet names.
           -S : Do not display star names.
           -s : Do not display ships.
    -(number) : Do not display the #'d ship or planet (should it obstruct the
                view of another object). Stars or planets are numbered
                sequentially from 1, while ships can be references by their ship
                number.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  map, cs, scope, zoom

& order

{{NAME}}
  order [0] -- Give ships standing orders

{{SYNTAX}}
  order <shipnumber of shiptypes> <order> <arguments...>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Order gives standing orders to the ship specified. A list of ship types can
also be used instead of a ship number. This will order all ships of the
designated types in the same level the same. For example,
'order dBC <orders...>' will order all destroyers, battleships, and cruisers in
the current scope.
  Certain ships cannot be given certain orders; The program will notify the user
of illegal orders.
  If no shipnumber is specified, the program will list the orders of all ships
in the current ship. If a shipnumber is specified, but no other arguments are
given, the orders for that ship will be displayed.
  Currently the orders that can be changed are:
    merchant -- Controls whether or not ship is in merchant mode. See
                'help route' for details.
                Syntax: order <shipnumber> merchant <off/route number>

    destination -- The ship will attempt to move towards the star/planet/ship
                   specified. This order cannot be changed for ships that are
                   landed or docked.
                   Syntax: order <shipnumber> destination <destination>

    speed -- change the speed of a ship. All speed factors between 0 and 9.
             Higher speeds use fuel less efficiently than lower speeds.
             Syntax: order <shipnumber> speed <speed factor>

    stockpile -- Many of ships use stockpiles. That means you don't need to
                 load resources in ships to repair or use them. It is enough
                 if there is resos or fuel on planet where they are landed.
                 Syntax: order stockpile (on or off)
                 NOTE: Ships work before planet produces new goodies. So if
                       you want your ships to use stockpiles be sure there
                       is one to use BEFORE an update.

    jump -- This orders the ship to activate its hyper-space engines in order
            to jump to another star system. The ship cannot be ordered to
            navigate when the engines are activated. In order to use the
            hyperspace jump, the engines must reach a charge level of 1, then
            the ship is 'ready'. When the engines are activated and charge is
            complete, the ship will automatically jump to the destination
            system (specified with order). Ships that do not have hyper-drive
            may not use this option.
            Syntax: order jump <on or off>

    impact -- A missile can be designated an impact sector. Upon reaching the
              destination planet it will explode centered upon the designated
              sector. A missile must have destruct loaded on board to be
              effective.
              Syntax: order <shipnumber> impact <x,y>

    scatter -- A missile can be designated to impact a random sector. When this
               is set, impact order above is undone. Ordering an impact sector
               undoes this order.
               Syntax: order <shipnumber> scatter

    switch -- Many devices have an on/off switch to activate or deactivate them.
              This option toggles the on or off status.
              Syntax: order <shipnumber> switch

    online -- Factories can be turned online by issuing this command.
              Syntax: order <shipnumber> online

    aim -- Change the ship/object 'aimed at'. There are several ship types that
           can do this, with different effect for each. For instance, Space
           Mirrors can be focused at an object in the same system or 2000
           distance away at a cost of 0.3 fuel (for maneuvering). Ships being
           focused on will take a certain about of damage per turn, and planets
           will experience temperature change corresponding to the intensity.
           Syntax: order <shipnumber> aim <target>

    intensity -- Change degree of focus for a space mirror.
                 Syntax: order <shipnumber> intensity <new intensity>

    transport -- This sets the target device for a transporter.
                 Syntax: order <shipnumber> transport <target device>

    evade -- This orders a ship to be performing evasive maneauvers. Although
             this makes a ship, when moving, harder to hit, it also uses up
             twice as much fuel as normal.
             Syntax: order <shipnumber> evade <on or off>

    primary/secondary -- Activate primary or secondary gun systems. If no
                         argument is given the old default retaliation strength
                         is used.
                         Syntax: order <shipnumber> primary [<strength>]
                         Syntax: order <shipnumber> secondary [<strength>]

    retaliate -- Normally, if a ship is attacked and suffers damage, it and all
                 ships assigned to protect will immediately retaliate with one
                 salvo against the violating ships. A ship can also be ordered
                 *not* to retaliate.
                 Syntax: order <shipnumber> retaliate <on or off>

    laser -- If this is set, the ship will use it's combat lasers to attack with
             instead of normal fire. The player must specify how many strength
             points will fire upon retaliation (or default fire power). For
             every point of strength, a laser uses 2 fuel points instead of
             destruct for the attack. The ship must have lasers mounted as well
             as a crystal in the hyperdrive.
             Sytanx: order <shipnumber> laser <on or off> <default strength>

    navigate -- While this is on the destination described above is ignored and
                instead, the ship will travel in the direction specified by the
                course. The directions are specified with degrees between 0 and
                360 where 0 is 'up', 90 is 'right', 180 is 'down' etc. You must
                also specify the number of turns to do the maneuver. After every
                move the turn count is decremented one until it becomes zero.
                After the maneuver the navigate setting is automatically turned
                off and if a destination has been set the ship will then proceed
                in that direction.
                Syntax: order <shipnumber> navigate <course> <turns>

    protect -- This allows a ship to protect another ship. Suppose, for example,
               ship A is set to protect ship B. If another ship C fires at B
               then both B *and* A will retaliate. This allows players to design
               their own defense networks. If no argument is specified protect
               will be turned off.
               Syntax: order <shipnumber> protect <ship to protect>

    salvo -- This allows players to control the strength of their
             retaliate/defense/protect response. By default it is set to the
             number of guns of the ship.
             Sytanx: order <shipnumber> salvo <number of guns>

    defense -- If this is set 'on' it will retaliate if the planet that it is
               in orbit around or landed on is attacked. If it is set 'off' the
               ship will not retaliate if its host planet is attacked.
               Syntax: order <shipnumber> defense <on or off>

    switch -- Turn mines and transporters on or off.
              Syntax: order <shipnumber> switch

    explosive -- If the ship is a mine or a gamma ray laser, this command will
                 set it to be in explosive mode which can damage ships.
                 Syntax: order <shipnumber> explosive

    radiative -- Similar to the previous command. Radiation mines and gamma ray
                 lasers incapacitate ships.
                 Syntax: order <shipnumber> radiative

    move -- If the ship is a terraforming device or space plow, the direction it
            is to move across the planet. the direction is given as a single
            digit, similar to those used in the regular "move" command.
            Syntax: order <shipnumber> move <x>

    hop -- If ship is a terraformer, space plow or dome, hop order can be given.
           If hop is on (default) ship will automatically change sector it's
           working on when sector becomes ready (fert 100%, efficiency 100% or
           wanted sectortype). Plow will hop into the lowest fertility, dome in
           lowest efficiency compatible own or empty sector, and terraformer
           into another non compatible and non wasteland, own or empty sector.

    limit -- Limit will set the target efficiency compatibility or fertility
             when Y, T or K will hop into next sector.
             Syntax: order <sip> limit <wanted %>

    autoscrap -- When YKT type of ship got nothing else to do and autoscrap
                 is ordered on, ship will automatically scrap itself.

    trigger -- If the ship is a mine the trigger radius can be specified.
               Syntax: order <shipnumber> trigger <trigger radius>

    disperse -- Will mine disperse when it becomes empty. Word of warning...
                empty mines are easy to capture by your enemy.

    fleet -- Order a ship to join a fleet from A to Z. You must be the admiral
             of the fleet (or be an unused fleet).

    cloak -- Order a ship to activate its cloaking device. The cloak will be
             activated on the next segment or update.
             Syntax: order <shipnumber> cloak <on|off>

    smartgun -- Automatically return fire on the types of ships in <list>.
                This is used to prevent less significant ships from wasting
                your ship's destruct in retaliation.
                Syntax: order <shipnumber> smart strength <amt>
                        order <shipnumber> smart list <list>
                        order <shipnumber> smart gun <primary|secondary|off>

  Ships that are landed or docked, or have no crew and are not robotic ships,
cannot be given orders.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  scope, actionpoints

& page

{{NAME}}
  page [0] -- Tell another player that you are looking for them

{{SYNTAX}}
  page <player>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  If a player not at universal scope, he/shee can page another player. The
player must have diety status or physically be inhabiting the system in some
capacity. The paged player will get a message that the paging player is looking
for him in the system. This is a way of calling someone for a conference.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  announce, who

& pay

{{NAME}}
  pay [variable] -- Pay money to another race

{{SYNTAX}}
  pay <race> <amount>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to transfer funds from your treasury to another race's
treasury. There are not conditions on payments. Paying spends 1 global ap / 1000
money.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  money, treasury

& personal

{{NAME}}
  personal [0]  -- Leave a personal message in your profile

{{SYNTAX}}
  personal <message>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Races can put a personal message in their profile such as mailing address of
whatever they wish.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  profile

& pledge

{{NAME}}
  pledge [0] -- Say yes to an invitation to join a block
  unpledge [0] -- Leave a block
  invite [0] -- Invite another race to join your block
  uninvite [0] -- Kick a race out of your block

{{SYNTAX}}
  pledge <race>
  unpledge <race>
  invite <race>
  uninvite <race>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Each race may lead one alliance block. In order to get people into the group
you must use the 'invite <race>' to request membership. The other player may
join the alliance block by using 'pledge <leader race>'. A race may quit by
doing 'unpledge <leader race>', or blackball another for his group by doing
'uninvite <race>'. Alliance blocks do not force alliances among its members. In
fact, it solely is used for political purposes.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  block, power, relation

& post

{{NAME}}
  post [1] -- Post a message to the Galactic News

{{SYNTAX}}
  post

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Message can be posted to the Galactic News using the 'post' command. This
(depending on game settings) costs action points.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  send, read

& power

{{NAME}}
  power [0] -- List empires and their approximate influence

{{SYNTAX}}
  power

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command lists all races you know at least 11%. The more you know about
the race, the more correct the information will be. Power provides summary
information as follows:
    rank - Race's rank standing in the game (who's winning)
    #    - Race number (followed by relationship indicators)
    Name - Race name
    VP   - Estimated victory points (for comparing relative standing)
    mil  - Estimated total military size
    civ  - Estimated total population
    cash - Estimated treasury size
    ship - Estimated number of ships
    pl   - Estimated number of controlled planets (colonies)
    res  - Estimated resources accumulated total stockpile
    fuel - Estimated fuel accumulated total stockpile
    dest - Estimated destruct accumulated total stockpile
    morl - Estimated morale of the race
    know - What percent you know this particular race

{{SEE ALSO}}
  victory

& profile

{{NAME}}
  profile [0] -- Racial profile

{{SYNTAX}}
  profile <race name>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This points out some major information about a race. For example:
    Race's morale
    Race's tech (and list of your race's discoveries)
    Gun ranges
    Space telescope range
    Ground telescope range
    Major sectortype

  And a bunch of less important info, like capital ship, number of active
updates. This command also prints out a short summary of race's major
characteristics, like IQ, mass, fight, metabolism...
  You can see race's optimal planet conditions and your own sector preferences
too. Add some personal information with 'personal' command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  victory, power, relation, personal

& promote

{{NAME}}
  promote [0] -- Promote your governor

{{SYNTAX}}
  promote <governor> <rank level>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Every governor have a military rankings. Different governors can give
different commands. Raceleader can assign ranks to governors using 'promote'
command. Different rank levels are:
    General
    Captain
    Private
    Novice

{{SEE ALSO}}
  appoint, ranks

& purge

{{NAME}}
  purge [0] -- Clean out marked dispatches or wipe all telegrams

{{SYNTAX}}
  purge dispatches -- Cleans out all dispatches marked for deletion
  purge telegrams  -- Wipes out all telegrams
  purge all        -- Accomplishes both of the above

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The 'purge' command will remove all dispatches that have been previously
marked for deletion. It will also erase all telegrams that have been sent to you
so far.
  There is also an 'autopurge' toggle that will immediately run the purge
command upon executing the 'delete' command. It will also run the purge command
immediately after reading your telegrams. The 'autopurge' toggle makes it
unnecessary to run 'purge' command.
  This command has abbreviations: 'purge d', 'purge t', and 'purge a'.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  delete, toggle

& quit

{{NAME}}
  quit [0] -- Disconnect from the server.

{{SYNTAX}}
  quit

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This closes down the connection between the user's site and the server.

& read

{{NAME}}
  read [0] -- Read dispatches sent to you by other players, or read telegrams
              sent by ships/planets, or read the Galactic News.

{{SYNTAX}}
  read dispatches  -- Read all dispatches sent to you by players
  read dispatch #  -- Read a specific dispatch #
  read telegrams   -- Read all telegrams sent to you by ships and planets
  read news        -- Read the Galactic News
  read declaration -- Read the Galactic News gossip column
  read combat      -- Read the Galactic News bloodshed
  read bussiness   -- Read the Galactic News business pages
  read postings    -- Read letters to the editor

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The 'read' command is used to read dispatches sent to you by other players,
telegrams sent by the server during updates or segments, or the Galactic News.
Players may send you dispatches from time to time. Dispatches are messages used
for intra-player communication, basically a type of email. The server will send
you telegrams when things happen such as ships reading their destinations,
attacks against you when you ewre not signed into the game, and other such
events. The Galactic News contains information about new relations between
races, combat reports, trading between races, and general message from other
races. A player can post a message on the Galactic News by using the 'post'
command.
  The commands my be abbreviated (i.e., 'read d', 'read t', 'read n', etc.)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  post, send

& relation

{{NAME}}
  relation [0] -- State relations

{{SYNTAX}}
  relation <race>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command prints out the relations between the player's race and those of
other races in the game. It also gives the translation modifiers for each race.
  If an argument is given, the relationships towards that race is displayed
only. If no arguments are given, the relationships towards your race are shown.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  declare

& repair

{{NAME}}
  repair [0] -- Repair a planet/sectors

{{SYNTAX}}
  repair <xlow:xhi,ylow:yhi or x,y>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Players can repair sectors which have wasted designations, due to combat or
other effects. The player must change scope to the planet. If no arguments are
given, all sectors will be repaired to the limit of available resources. A
player must inhabit at least one sector and have 10 resources for each sector
repaired. If arguments are given, a rectangular area specified by the player
will be repaired. Note that only wasted sectors can be repaired, and sectors
inhabited by aliens may not be repaired.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  survey

& report

{{NAME}}
  report [0] -- Navigational ship report

{{SYNTAX}}
  report <#shipnum or ship types>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows users to survey their ships. Where 'stock' gives
information about what a ship is carrying, 'report' will give information about
where the ship is and where it is going.
  If given with no arguments, 'report' will start with the current scope and
give reports on all ships from there down.
  Additional information about the ship can be obtained with the 'examine'
command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  examine, ship, stock, stats

& reserve

{{NAME}}
  reserve -- Used to reserved fuel and resources on a planet

{{SYNTAX}}
  reserve <amt> res
  reserve <amt> fuel

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Use this command to reserved fuel or resources in your stockpiles that the
infrastructure machine and any other machines that use stockpiles will ignore.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  infrastructure

& revoke

{{NAME}}
  revoke [0] -- Remove a governor's powers

{{SYNTAX}}
  revoke <governor #> <governor to get belongings>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command removes a governor from power, and it can only be done by the
race's leader. When a governor is remove, the leader must specify which other
governor will get the ex-governor's ships, star systems, and money. The leader
can specify "0" for themselves.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  appoint, governors, grant, who

& route

{{NAME}}
  route [0] -- Sets and provides information about shipping routes

{{SYNTAX}}
  route - Show all active shipping routes for the planet
  route <number> - Show the route at the planet specified by <number>
  route <number> <path> - This will set the route number to the planet given by
                          the path. The route must be active.
  route <number> activate - Activate the shipping route
  route <number> deactivate - Deactivate the route
  route <number> land <x,y> - Ships will land on sector x,y
  route <number> load <list of commodities> - Load the commodities when landed
  route <number> unload <list of commodities> - Unload the commodities when
                                                landed

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to set up automated shipping for your empires. Each
planet is allowed to have 4 routes activated, number 1 through 4. A route has
the following components:
    destination: This is where ships on the route will travel to next, after
                 loading and unloading at the planet. If a ship has hyperspace
                 capability, jumps will be ordered. Destinations are set during
                 all movement segments and updates. Only ships with merchant
                 shipping set to the route will be given the orders.
    activate/deactivate: This will control whether route orders are given to
                         arriving merchant ships.
    land: Ships must land on a sector to perform their loading/unloading orders.
          If a ship does not have the fuel to land, it won't. Merchant ships
          will not crash land. The player must also control the route sector, or
          it must be vacant.
    load/unload: Once landed, ships will embark and disembark commodities
                 specified at the planet. Note that the maximum possible
                 transfer will always be ordered.
                 Example:
                   route 3 load rfdx   Will order route 3 merchants to load
                                       r, f, d, and xtals.
                   route 1 unload rd   Will order route 1 merchants to unload
                                       all r and d. Note that you should not
                                       order ships to unload fuel for obvious
                                       reasons!

{{EXAMPLE}}
  You produce destruction in /Vaasa/Hima, resource in /Espoo/Otski and you want
to move those in your home planet /Espoo/Nysvaekoto, using cargoship #357.
  First create route.
    'cs /Espoo/Nysvaekoto'
    'route 1 activate'
    'route 1 land 0,0'           Or whatever is a good sector
    'route 1 load f'             Now your ship has fuel to travel
    'route 1 unload rd'          Commodities delivery
    'route 1 /Espoo/Otski'       Next stop
    'cs /Espoo/Otski'
    'route 1 activate'
    'route 1 land 0,0'
    'route 1 load r'
    'route 1 /Vaasa/Hima'        Next stop
    'cs /Vaasa/Hima'
    'route 1 activate'
    'route 1 land 3,4'           Again sector is just an example
    'route 1 load d'
    'route 1 /Espoo/Nysvaekoto'  Back to home and ship will start another round

  Second order ship into that route.
    'order #357 merchant 1'         Now #357 knows to follow route 1
    'roder #357 dest /Espoo/Otski'  First travel must be ordered

{{SEE ALSO}}
  order

& schedule

{{NAME}}
  schedule [0] -- Give player information of the schedule for updates

{{SYNTAX}}
  schedule

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This option provides information about the update schedule

{{SEE ALSO}}
  time

& scrap

{{NAME}}
  scrap [1|0] -- Junk a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  scrap <#shipnum>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Scrap allows users to reclaim the resources consumed in building a ship or
object. Because of labor costs, only 50% of the original cost of the ship/object
can be reclaimed.
  Upon scrapping this ship, its reclamation value plus any commodities it may
have in its hold, are added to the stockpiles of the planet it is on. If the
ship is docked with another ship, commodities up to equal of the free space of
another ship can be reclaimed.
  If the ship is not landed, no resources may be reclaimed. If the ship has crew
or troops that cannot be rescued then your race will suffer a morale hit equal
to double the cost of the ship (this does not apply to pods). Scrapping normally
costs one AP, however, does not cost APs at the universe level scope.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  dock, build

& sell

{{NAME}}
  sell [20] -- Put a lot of commodities up for sale in the market

{{SYNTAX}}
  sell <commodity> <amount>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Galactic Bloodshed allows players to sell raw commodities. You must 'cs' to a
planet which contains the goods to be sold. These goods are then subtracted from
the planet stockpiles, and placed as a 'lot' for open bidding between players.
The highest bidder on the lot will get the goods at the second update after
putting it up for sale.
  You must have a government center '@', space port 'J', space station 'S', or
habitat 'H', at a planet to sell from it. The ship must be undamaged.

{{EXAMPLE}}
  sell f 100  - Subtracts 100 fuel from the planet and puts up a lot for sale in
                the market. The higest bidder two updates later will get the
                fuel.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  bid, money

& send

{{NAME}}
  send [1] -- Send dispatches to other players

{{SYNTAX}}
  send <race #> <message>        -- This will send a dispatch to all governors
                                    of the given race.
  send <race #> <governor #>     -- This will send a dispatch to the given
                                    governor of the given race.
  send block <block #> <message> -- Sends a dispatch to every member of the
                                    given block.
  send star </Star> <message>    -- Send a dispatch to all inhabitants of a
                                    star.

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows users to communicate with each other. The player must
specify who they wish to contact, and a message to send to that player. Races
that receive your dispatch will gain a little knowledge of your race.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  read

& ship

{{NAME}}
  ship [0] -- Ship report

{{SYNTAX}}
  ship <#shipnum or shiptypes>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows users to survey their ships. It is equivalent to
requesting a stock, report, and tactical report for each ship. This command
uses scoping in the same way other commands do. Ship types are detailed in the
"build" docs. Additional information about ships can be obtained with the
'examine' command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  examine, report, tactical, stats

& stars

{{NAME}}
  stars [0] -- Obtain information of star positions

{{SYNTAX}}
  stars <radius>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is used to examine information regarding stellar positions. If
the argument is specified, all stars within the given (integer) range are
listed. If no argument all positions are listed.
  NOTE: Output may be used with the 'psmap' program.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  map, psmap

& stats

{{NAME}}
  stats [0] -- Report ship characteristics

{{SYNTAX}}
  stats <#shipnum or ship types>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows users to examine characteristics of their ships.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  examine, ship, stock, tactical, scope, report

& status

{{NAME}}
  status [0] -- Status report for colonies

{{SYNTAX}}
  status <star>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command gives a list of all the occupied planets in the star systems
given, along with the population and level of tech investment at each of them.
It shows the amount of "extra" technology that will be generated by the given
investment, and the "maximum" amount (the amount that would be gained by
investing all the production (but not all the stockpiles)) in technology. If no
stars are specified, a status report for all colonies is printed.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  profile, technology

& stock

{{NAME}}
  stock [0] -- Stockpile report

{{SYNTAX}}
  stock <#shipnum or shiptypes>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows users to survey their ships. It gives basic information
about cargo and crew. If given with no arguments, 'stock' will start with the
current scope and give reports on all ships form there down.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  ship, report, tactical, scope

& survey

{{NAME}}
  survey [0] -- More details survey of planet, sector, star

{{SYNTAX}}
  survey <xlow:xhi,ylow:yhi or x,y>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Survey gives a different report depending on what scope it is used on. The
possible scopes are sector, planet, and star. Census on sector:
    > x,y cond/type  owner race eff mob frt  res  mil popn ^popn xtals
    > 0,0   o   #        2    0  15  10  34  205    0  517     0

      x,y: Map coordinates of sector
     cond: Designation of sector appearance (after terraforming, nuking etc.)
     type: Desgination of sector (land, water, etc.)
    owner: Owner of sector
     race: Original owner (startingsectors only)
      eff: Efficiency (%age it is built up) of the sector
      mob: % mobilization of the citizens in that sector
      frt: Fertility of the sector (supports people)
      res: Resource deposits in the sector
     popn: Population of the sector
    ^popn: Maximum population the sector can support
    xtals: This says yes if sector contains crystals (only if you have
           crystaltech)

  Census on planet
  Example planet Ergos:
    > Ergos
    > gravity   x,y absolute     x,y relative to Artemis
    >    0.30   193860.0,148066.4     -289.4,  -772.0

      gravity: Gravity of the planet (relative to Earth normal)
      x,y absolute: Coordinates relative to the Center of the Universe
      x,y relative...: Coordinates relative to the planet's primary

    > ======== Planetary conditions: =======
    > atmosphere concentrations:
    >      methane 72%(72%)     oxygen 00%(00%)
    >          CO2 01%(01%)   hydrogen 12%(12%)      temperature: -28 (-25)
    >     nitrogen 02%(02%)     sulfur 01%(01%)           normal: -25
    >       helium 01%(01%)      other 11%(11%)
    >                      Toxicity: 14% (Stage 1, mild)
    > Total planetary compatibility: 85.74%
    >             Average fertility: 8
    >              Average resource: 202
    >               Crystal sectors: 0
    >       Total resource deposits: 24343

      ======== planetary conditions: ========
      Gives the atmospheric concentrations of certain key elements in the
      planet's atmosphere: Oxygen, CO2, Methane, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Helium,
      Sulfur, surface temperature, normal temperature (without artifical
      influencing factors like space mirros), and 'Other'. The 'Total planetary
      compatibility' is the difference between the weighted sum of each of these
      characteristics and the preferences of the player (express in parentheses
      after each characteristic).

    > fuel_stock  resource_stock dest_pot.   popltn    ^popltn
    >     173             92       101       1158       2901

      fuel_stock: Fuel the player has managed to stockpile on the planet
      resource_stock: Stockpiled resources on the planet
      dest_pot: Stockpiled destructive potential on the planet (weapons)
      popltn: Total population of living beings
      ^popltn: Maximum number of living beings the planet can support (inhabited
               sectors only)

  Census on star
  Example star Artemis
    > Star Artemis
    > locn: 194149.437261,148838.373757
    > Gravity: 455.50        Instability: 2% (stable)
    > temperature class (1->10) 4
    > 9 planets are Larissa Gorgon Bragi Geirrod Ergos Dagon Argus Euripedes
    >   Drak

      locn: x,y coordinates of the star from the Center of the Universe
      gravity: Gravitational influence
      Instability: Stability of the star. As stability approaches 100, the star
                   will become more and more unstable. The player must have a
                   technology of 3 or more to determine the stability.
      Temperature class: How hot the star is. Hotter it is fast the pods will
                         warm.
      List of obiting planets

{{SEE ALSO}}
  colonies, explore

& tactical

{{NAME}}
  tactical [0] -- Provies a report on a ship or ships ability to perform
                  military maneuvers.

{{SYNTAX}}
  tactical                     Provides summary tactical information for all
                               enemy, allied, and neutral ships and planets
                               in the current scope.

  tactical <shiptype>          Provides summary tactical information for all
                               ships (of a given type) and planets at the
                               current scope

  tactical <#ship>             Provides detailed tactical information for the
                               given ship.

  tactical <#ship> <shiptype>  Provides detailed tactical information for the
                               given ship limited to viewing shiptype.

  tactical <#ship> <player>    Provides detailed tactical information for the
                               given ship limited to a player's ships.

  tactical -                   Provides detailed tactical information for the
                               planet at the current scope.

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The tactical command allows a governor to survey their ships for the purpose
of conducting offensive/defensive activities. This command differs from 'report'
in that it provides information on a ship's ability to attack enemy ships or
planets. Information provided includes enemy's size, range, bearing, speed,
heading, evasive maneuvers, the range at which the chance to hit will be 50%,
the chance to hit at the current range, the ship's current damage level, and the
potential damage from a full broadside of the attacking ship's guns. Enemy ships
will only appear on tactical display if they are in the same scope as the
calling ship. This limitation is the same as the orbit command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  report, weapons, stats

& tax

{{NAME}}
  tax [0] -- Set the tax rate of a planet

{{SYNTAX}}
  tax <rate>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  A player can generate money by "taxing" his populations. Each planet can be
assigned a tax rate. In order to set the tax rate of a planet, the player must
first change scope it and tax a rate between 0 and 100 (percent). The tax rate
is then placed into the "new" tax rate. This is the rate that the existing rate
will change towards 5% to after every update. The tax rate may have several
effects on the production/stability of the planet.
    Effective metabolism = race metabolism & (1 - tax% / 100)
    Example metab 1.4 tax 30% yields 1.4 * (1 - 30 / 100) = 0.98
 The amonut of money generated by a planet per update is tax% * popluation / 5.
The tax rate may adversely affect a planet in that it opens the possibility that
insurgency may be used against it, which can cause revolts and ensuing civil
war.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  money, treasury, pay, technology, insrugency

& techlevel

{{NAME}}
  techlevel [0] -- Displays tech level required for discovery.

{{SYNTAX}}
  techlevel

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command shows what technology level is required to obtain a given
discovery and what technologies your race has currently discovered.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  discoveries

& technology

{{NAME}}
  technology [1] -- Invest money into tech production

{{SYNTAX}}
  technology <money from treasury per update>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command sets a quota for technological investment. Each turn, each race's
technology is decreased by 1% then intelligence / 100 is added to its
technology. If your race is disadvantaged by a low IQ you can balance this
discrepency by investing money into research and development.
  Each turn the quota is deducted from your race's treasury (if there is enough)
and added logrithmically to your race's total tech production. As you increase
the quota on one planet, you will notice, the actual tech production increases
less and elss; thus, it is important to have a wider cultural base (lots of
planets) for better tech development.
  The additional technology increase per update for a planet is given by a
rather complex forumal:
    tech = 0.001 * sqrt(investment * SCALE)  where SCALE = population / 1000

{{SEE ALSO}}
  status, treasury, money

& think

{{NAME}}
  think 0] -- Send a message to every governor/leader of your race

{{SYNTAX}}
  think <message>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This comand is similar to 'broadcast', except instead of sending your message
to everyone in the game, it sends the message to the leader of your race and all
its governors. Note that in order to receive the message, the leader or governor
must be logged on. This command also can only be used to send messages to your
own race

{{SEE ALSO}}
  communications

& time

{{NAME}}
  time [0] -- Show current time and other stats

{{SYNTAX}}
  time

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command tells the player the current time, times of latest updates and
movement segments, and when the server was started.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  schedule

& toggle

{{NAME}}
  toggle [0] -- Turn on/off some options

{{SYNTAX}}
  toggle <option_name>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Toggle turns on or off the named option. If no option is given, toggle will
list all available options and thier values. Options:
      autoload       If set, full crew and fuel will be loaded after building a
                     new ship.
      autopurge      Automatically purges all telegrams after reading and
                     instantly purges dispatches upon deleting.
      client         If set, the server will send CSP codes. If you're using a
                     GB client you'll want this on.
      color          If set, color codes will be sent. This requires an ANSI
                     capable term and like some other settings on your client
                     (like 'set ansi on' for gbII).
      compatability  Controls whether or not explored planets have the
                     compatability displayed on orbit maps.
      double_digits  Display alien numbers with double digits.
      gag            Will turn off global broadcasts.
      geography      If set, playernumbers will not be displayed.
      inverse        Whether or not to use reverse video.
      visible        Controls whether or not the player appears on the 'who'
                     list.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  map, highlight

& toxicity

{{NAME}}
  toxicity [1] -- Set threshold for building toxic waste canisters

{{SYNTAX}}
  toxicity <threshold>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command sets a toxicity threshold for the planet in the current scope.
When toxicity of the planet is greater than or equal to this threshold, a toxic
waste canister will be built and as much toxic waste loaded on as will fit.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  survey

& transfer

{{NAME}}
  transfer [0] -- Transfer supplies to alien stockpiles

{{SYNTAX}}
  transfer <race> <commodity> <amount>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows the player to transfer resources/fuel/destruct to another
race. To do this the player must have the planet where the transfer is to take
place as the current scope. Transferred supplies are immediately deducted from
the transferring race's stockpiles and added to the targeted race's stockpiles.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  scope

& treasury

{{NAME}}
  treasury [0] -- Shows your financial situation

{{SYNTAX}}
  treasury

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This shows the player how much money he/she currently has, how much were
incomes and costs last update.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  money

& undock

{{NAME}}
  undock [0] -- Undock a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  undock <#shipnum>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command is a synonym for luanch

{{SEE ALSO}}
  launch, land, dock

& uninvite

{{NAME}}
  uninvite [0] -- Kick a race out of your block
  invite [0] -- Invite another race to join your block
  pledge [0] -- Say yes to an invitation to join a block
  unpledge [0] -- Leave a block

{{SYNTAX}}
  uninvite <race>
  invite <race>
  pledge <race>
  unpledge <race>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Each race may lead one alliance block. In order to get people into the group
you must use the 'invite <race>' to request membership. The other play may join
the alliance block by using 'pledge <leader race>'. A race may quit by doing
'unpledge <leader race>, or blackball another for his group by doing
'uninvite race'. Alliance blocks do not force alliances among its members. In
fact, it is solely used for poliitical purposes.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  block, power, relation

& unload

{{NAME}}
  unload [0] -- Load/unload commodities to/from a hip

{{SYNTAX}}
  unload <#shipnum> <commodity> <amount>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  The load command is used for the resupplying of ships, and the disembarking of
colonies. If no arguments are specified, the program will prompt the user for:
      #shipnum -- What ship to load from/to
      d|c|r|f|x|m -- Specify destruction, crew, resources, fuel, military, or
                     crystals to load/unload. Destruction, resources and fuel
                     are taken from that user's stockpiles, while people are
                     tacken from the sector the ship is landed on. If the ship
                     is docked with another ship and not a planet, the transfers
                     will be direct.
      amount -- The amount to load (if negative, the amount will be subtracted).
                This must be within certain bounds: the maximum cargo capacity
                of each ship unless one or both of the ships are shuttles.
                Shuttles are unique in that their design allows cargo to be
                strapped to their hull, and thus they can actually hold more
                cargo than the maximum. An overloaded shuttle cannot, however,
                take off or land until it jettisons its excess. If no amount
                argument is specified, the maximum available of the commodity
                will be loaded on board.
  If the ship is neither landed at a planet nor docked with another vessel, the
player can't load/unload its cargo/passengers.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  loda, jettison

& unpledge

{{NAME}}
  unpledge [0] -- Leave a block
  pledge [0] -- Say yes to an invitation to join a block
  invite [0] -- Invite another race to join your block
  uninvite [0] -- Kick a race out of your block

{{SYNTAX}}
  unpledge <race>
  pledge <race>
  invite <race>
  uninvite <race>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Each race may lead one alliance block. In order to get people to into their
group you must use the 'invite <race>' to request membership. The other player
may join the alliance block by using 'pledge <leader race>'. A race may quit by
doing 'unpledge <leader race>', or blackball another for his group by doing
'uninvite <race>'. Alliance blocks do not force alliances among its members. In
fact, it solely is used for political purposes.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  block, power, relation

& upgrade

{{NAME}}
  upgrade [0] -- Upgrade attributes of a ship

{{SYNTAX}}
  upgrade <attribute> <value>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command works just liek 'modify' except that it is performed on ships
(non-factories) which have already been built. The player must have enough
resources on board the ship or on planet if it is landed to make the upgrade.
The cost for an upgrade is 2 * (the difference between the ship with the
alteration and the old value of the ship). Upgrade is only used to increase a
parameter (you may not decrease a parameter).

{{SEE ALSO}}
  modify, make, build

& victory

{{NAME}}
  victory [0] -- Describe current standings of players

{{SYNTAX}}
  victory

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This commands shows how close players are to winning the game. It sorts the
player list by proximity to winning, so the object of the game is to get your
name to the top of the list. :-) Here are the winning conditions, where X and Y
are settable for each game:
      1) "Control" of a planet is more than 50% occupancy of same.
      2) The first player to control X percent of all planets for Y conseuctive
         updates wins.
      3) Any other players who controls X percent of all planets at that time
         also win.
  Note: Asteroids do not count in the victory totals.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  power

& vote

{{NAME}}
  vote [0] -- Vote on Galactic Bloodshed issue

{{SYNTAX}}
  vote [issue [option]]

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Issues - update
  Options - 'go' or 'wait'
  You may vote on the 'update' issue using the command 'vote update go'. This
tells the server that you are done doing whatever it is that you want to do, and
are just basically waiting for the next update. If you have voted to go and
think of something else that you would list to do before an update, you can
'vote update wait'. After each update, your vote is reset to the wait state. If
and when EVERYONE (not counting Deities or Guests) votes to 'go'; an update will
be done. This is most likely to be used during the early portion of the game
when not much is happening and most people are just waiting for supplies to
build up. This gives the players a sort of "variable" input to the update
process. The update interval length chosen by the Deity then becomes the maximum
length, with a shorter interval occuring when everyone votes to go.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  update, segment, daemon

& walk

{{NAME}}
  walk [1] -- Move an AFV from one sector to another.

{{SYNTAX}}
  walk <ship> <direction>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This is used to move your AFVs from one sector to an adjacent sector. You may
move into alien occupied sectors with AFVs. Here are the permitted directions:
      7   8   9
       \  |  /
        \ | /
     4 -- . -- 6
        / | \
       /  |  \
      1   2   3
  Each sector costs 1 fuel point to execute and a crew must be present.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  afv

& weapons

{{NAME}}
  weapons [0] -- Show arament status of ships

{{SYNTAX}}
  weapons <#shipnum or shiptype>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  Show arament report of ship or ships. Example:
    > weapon
        #       name      laser    cew     safe      guns    damage   class
        2 @                          0/0      25     0 /  0       0%    Standard
      161 t                          0/0     136    10L/ 10       0%    Standard
      162 t                          0/0     136    10L/ 10       0%    Standard
      983 O                yes       0/0     253    50H/ 50       0%    Standard

         #: shipnumber and type
      name: Possible name of ship
     laser: Do this ship have a laser
       cew: cew strength/range
      safe: Max lasersalvo ship can shoot without a chance of crystal explosion
      guns: Number and caliber of primary/secondary guns
    damage: Ship's damage status
     class: Ship's class (see 'name' for info about creating different classes)

{{SEE ALSO}}
  report, tactical

& who

{{NAME}}
  who [0] -- Describes who is current connected to the game

{{SYNTAX}}
  who

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This describes which players are currently logged into the game. The last 3
fields are the status fields. The first is the DEITY or GUEST flag. The second
is the GAG flag, and the third is the INVISIBLE flag. Player can set
invisibility on/off by typing 'toggle visibility'. If invisibility is on, no
other but your own governors can see you. Currently logged in invisible players
are shown as cowards.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  announce, page

& whois

{{NAME}}
  whois [0] -- Gives you the race name given the race's number

{{SYNTAX}}
  whois <race # to identify>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command can be used when you know a race's number (such as information
you find on 'tactical', etc.) and you want to look up the race's name.
'identify' does the same thing.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  identify, who

& zoom

{{NAME}}
  zoom [0] -- Declare zoom values

{{SYNTAX}}
  zoom (amount) <x,y>

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This command allows users to alter the scale used in an orbit display. The
lower the number, the larger the display will be. Amount can be specified in one
of two ways: a floating-point format, in which case the amount will be the
amount give, or an i/j format, in which case the ammount will be the numerator
(i) divided by the denominator (j). The optional argument changes the
'lastx,lasty' coordinates to the specified coordinates, in case the player
desires a closeup of an area he has not explored yet. At a zoom scale of 1.0,
the display will be equal to the screen size. At a scale of greater than 1.0,
the display will be smaller than the screen; smaller than 1.0, and the screen
will zoom in to the displayed map. Display is centered around the current
'lastx,lasty' coordinates (see orbit). At game start, the zoom value is declared
as 1.0. There are two zoom factors, one for 'star' levl, and one for 'universe'
level. You can specify the 'lastx,lasty' for the universe level with the
'center <star>' command.

{{SEE ALSO}}
  orbit, map, center
