& faq

{{SUBJECT}}
  Galactic Bloodshed FAQ

The Galactic Bloodshed Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) is posted regularly on
to alt.games.gb (which doesn't see much activity these days, although you should
encourage its use).

The GB FAQ contains a wealth of information on getting set up and playing GB. If
you haven't read it, you should do so.

When the FAQ is updated, a copy is downloaded and put here for your convenience;
you may access it through the help system.

{{DESCRIPTION}}
The GB FAQ has been divided into small section to help you find the question you
are looking for and keep you from being inundated with a large file. This
command displays the FAQ by single sections.

{{EXAMPLES}}
    help faq    -- Displays this page.
    help faq 0  -- Displays the top FAQ page.
    help faq 2  -- Displays the FAQ table of contents.
    help faq 21 -- Displays the "What kind of planet should I choose?" topic.

& 0

Galactic Bloodshed FAQ Version 4.4 - Part 1 of 2

FAQ originally written by Doug Ingram
FAQ versions 0 --> 4.1 by John P. Deragon and Evan Koffler
FAQ versions 4.1 --> 4.2 Old and wrong information corrected. New psmap help.
FAQ versions 4.2 --> 4.3
    New addresses and information about current server codes.
    Info about GB mailing list.
    New section: newbies deadly sins.
    All addresses checked.
    1/6/97. Tapsa. (rauta@alpha.hut.fi)
FAQ 4.3 MAY 1997 by Tapio Ranta-aho (HTML format by Evan Koffler).
FAQ 4.4 March 2005 Updates and reformmating by Michael Wilkinson

& 1

Subject: 1. Introduction

This FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) was written to answer questions for those
interested in playing GB. It is oriented to those who are just getting started
with GB.

The latest version of the FAQ is available on SourceForge:
<http://gbp.sourceforge.net>

** This is the first of two parts **

Part 1 -- Frequently Asked Questions
Part 2 -- Advice from GB vets for novices

& 2

Subject: 2. Table of Contents

  (+) Indicates a new subject for this version
  (*) Indicates an updated subject for this version

** PART 1 **
      1. Introduction
      2. Table of Contents

-- Section I. Getting started
     *3. What is GB?
      4. What is HAP?
     +5. What is GB+?
     *6. Where can I get the client and/or server code?
     *7. What are the different versions of the server?
     +8. What are the different versions of the client?
     *9. What if I have problems compiling something?
    *10. How can I find out more about GB?
     11. Where are the current games running?
    *12. Is there a mailing list for GB?
    *13. Do I need a client to play GB?
     14. How can I start playing a game?
     15. How much times does it take to play GB?
     16. Is there a newsgroup for GB?

-- Section II. The game set-up
    +17. What is a racegen?
     18. What race should I choose?
     19. What's the difference between a normal and a morph?
     20. Which is better, morphs or normals?
     21. What kind of planet should I choose?
     22. What sector preferences should I take?
     23. What happens if I get a rotten home planet?
    *24. How can I get a postscript map?

-- Section III. Playing the game
     25. What is a move seg?
     26. What is an update?
     27. What strategy should I use?
     28. How do I change scope?
     29. How do I talk to others?
     30. What should I do first?
     31. How do I interpret the maps?
     32. How do factories work?
     33. What tax rate should I set?
     34. What's the difference between military and civilians?
     35. What should I set my mobilization level at?
     36. How do planetary guns work?
     37. How to atmosphere processors work?
     38. What's the quickest way to jump to other systems?
     39. How do I get hyperdrive on board ships?
     40. How do I build ships in space?
     41. How come I don't have any resources yet?
     42. My pods didn't explode when they reached their destination.
     43. How do I get a list of where my crystals are?
     44. How do I get crystals?
     45. How do I get a list of ship types I can build?
     46. What are the worst mistakes I may do?
     47. Final warnings and advice

** PART 2**
     48. Advice from veterans

-- Section I. Setting up your race
     49. Should I chose a metamorphic race or a normal race?
     50. What type of home planet should I choose?
     51. How should I spend my remaining points?
     52. What sector preferences should I chose?

-- Section II. The beginning of the game
     53. What should I do before the first update?
     54. What is the first ship I should build? The second?
     55. What can I do to increase my resource production on any given planet?

-- Section III. Later in the game
     56. Should I colonize the planets in my own system first, or should I focus
         on arriving in other systems before opponents can?
     57. What should I do when I see another ship other than my own?

& 3

Subject: *3. What is GB?

GB stands for "Galactic Bloodshed", it is a piece of Internet history.

GB is on of the original update-based client-server multi-player 4X Internet
text games. Expand your empire and exterminate your opponents as you explore the
galaxy and exploit its many resources.

GB was first written in 1989; it presented an alternative to the very complex
game 'Empire'. Both are 4X games, however, GB appealed to the sci-fi fans. It
never quite gained the popularity of  Empire, however, those that played GB were
hugely fanatical about it. The game itself required less daily time to play than
Empire and dealt more with combat and less with starting civilians. GB is one of
the first true examples of Open Source on the Internet; most admins that ran the
game also contributed to the code.

GB is a game played over the Internet by several users at various sites. The
remote site, where the game and its database reside, is generally referred to as
the "server". To connect to a game, players use a program called a "client" that
is run from their local computer.

& 4

Subject: 4. What is HAP?

"HAP" stands for "Heuristic Astronomy Project". HAP is a close relative of GB,
but there are many very important differences between the two. Rather than go
into the differences here, I suggest you continue reading through this and then
log in to one of the games yourself. Ask around and experiment and decide for
yourself what you like best in a game. Both "flavors" of GB (original and extra
crispy, if you like) approach the game in a different way. For example, in HAP
games, communication among players who have not met is restricted while on GB,
global communication is the rule...thus for help, it would be best to try a GB
game first where players can hear you. Of course, on the original HAP game, the
deity and developer of HAP, Clay Luther, is around most of the time, and there
are no restrictions on communicating with him in the game. As a general rule,
HAP tries to incorporate many of the best changes from new version of the
original code while bowing more to "realism" where possible.

& 5

Subject: +5. What is GB+?

GB+ has extensive rewrites over the original GB. There have been many flavors of
GB that branched from the original GB. GB+ was created and maintained by the
GBDT (Galactic Bloodshed Development Team) mainly as code reorganization, bug
fix, and architecture change effort. However, many God players made their own
mods to this (in the tradition of HAP). Home of these mods were MarVin, Balanced
Treehouse, Jekyll & Hyde, and Vengeance of Solkan. After the GBDT ceased
operations and a period of inactivity GB+ was renewed by some Finnish students
under their own mod, HUT. HUT had some major bug fixes and additions. Finally,
in 2005 GB+ has found a new home at SourceForge. The newest GB+ now contains
most modifications, bug fixes, and enhancements ever conceived and written into
the various above-mentioned mods.

When playing a GB game you're actually connecting to a GB+ server.

& 6

Subject: *6. Where can I get the client and/or server code?

Both the client and server code is available under the Galactic Bloodshed
Project at SourceForge. <http://gbp.sourceforge.net>

The code you'll find there is tarred and gzipped, so you'll need to know a
little bit about manipulating Unix files in order to set things up.

*** IMPORTANT ***

When you are ftping a binary file (i.e. ends with a .gz), you MUST set the file
transfer mode to binary! Most ftp programs and web browsers will handle this
automatically. However, id, for some reason, you do not transfer the file in
binary mode, it will be corrupt. If you experience a problem unzipping or
uncompressing a file, this is the problem 99% of the time. Simply re-download
the file in binary mode.

Here's a helpful example: Supposed you ftp gbII-2.6.0.tar.gz

First: gunzip gbII-2.6.0.tar.gz (gives you gbII2.6.0.tar)
Next: tar -xf gbII-2.6.0.tar (separates out all the files)
Then: delete the original tar file if you wish.

Info on these processes can be found in your system's help files, but if you
continue to have problems, post your questions to alt.games.gb newsgroup or
connect to one of the running gb games as guest and ask around for help. This is
usually the first best thing to try when you have any problems. After all, the
players have all had to go through the same things you will in order to get set
up in gb.

Once the files are in your directory in a conventional format, there will be
help files and so forth included. It's a good idea to print the help docs out
and have them handy when you play.

& 7

Subject: *7. What are the different versions of the server?

There have been many difference GB server, almost every deity made their own
modifications. These were some of the good ones:

GB+ by the GBDT.
MarVin code by Ralf Zessin.
GB 5.0 HUT by a Finnish developing team.
V1.7.5 Balanced Treehouse (Valentine's Day code) by Greg Merrill

However, the newest GB+ (6.0) available at SourceForge has brought together all
the mods and hacks that were available in the above servers.

& 8

Subject: +8. What are the different versions of the client?

Just like GB was the original name for the server, the first client for GB
(after telnet) was imply called gb. Then Evan Koffler (aka Keeshans) wrote gbII
for the Unix platform. Note that the gbII client successfully compiles only on
Unix machines or a close derivative of Unix (like Linux).

Scott Anderson (later modded by Rich Fitzgerald) wrote an X-windows extension to
gbII that displays map using an X display. This is now included by default in
the latest gbII (2.6.0).

There is/was also a version of a PC based client for GB available, written by
Chris Fodor (aka Feepness), however, at this time it is MIA and not available at
SourceForge (yet).

Additionally, there's the Jurmunian Java Client, however, at this time it is
also MIA.

& 9

Subject: *9. What if I have problems compiling something?

As mentioned earlier, the first thing you should always try is to log in to one
of the existing games as a guest and start asking around. There will often be
someone on who can help you with simple problems, but if they can't help you,
you have a couple of different recourses:

The GB listserver <mailto:gb@towerravens.com> has a few folks savvy with
compiling the client on a few different platforms. When posting to this list be
courteous, give him informed questions rather than just helplessly whining.

If you're having a problem with a bug in the server code, a good bet is to post
to alt.games.gb. There are enough users out there familiar with the code to help
you deal with whatever problem you're experiencing.

There are also forums available on the Galactic Bloodshed Project's SourceForge
page. However, these are fairly new.

When posting to these groups be polite and clearly describe your compiling
problem. In other words, don't just write and say "It doesn't compile on the
NeXT and crashed when I try to boot it." At the least, run the code through a
debugger of some kind to get a line number within a routine or at least get some
kind of output sequence. This gives the person helping you some reference point
from which to track the problem down.

& 10

Subject: *10. How can I find out more about GB?

The Galactic Bloodshed Project's SourceForge page:
  <http://gbp.sourceforge.net>

You can also try a google search for more information or (because it's an old
game) try www.waybackmachine.com on some old URLs:
  GB Documentation Page:
    <http://www.hut.fi/~rauta/gbhtml/thump/gbpage.html>

  Gardan's HUT Page:
    <http://www.niksula.cs.hut.fi/~jkoi/gb>

  Jumunian Java Client Page:
    <http://www.iki.fi/~kse/gb/JavaClient>

  GB Server Development History:
    <http://www.idle.com/~evank/gb/gbhistory.html>

  Aldan Game Page:
    <http://aldan.netvision.net.il/~sasha/gb>

  Kaos Game Page:
    <http://orion.unm.edu/gb>

  Valentine's Day Massacre Page:
    <http://www.halycon.com/merrill/gdm/gb/gbtoc.html>

  J & H Page: (Has VB and Java Clients)
    <http://www.incenter.org/gb/index.html>

Try logging in to one of the current games running. Some games have a guest
account set up specifically for new users to find their way around and ask
questions. When it asks for a password, simply type "guest" or "guest 0" in most
places, and you'll be logged in to the game. There's no guarantee that there
will be someone on who can help you and/or has the time, but during the evening
is generally the best time to try.

there is also GB mailing list. See below.

& 11

Subject: 11. Where are the current games running?

I used to keep a list of this, but it's just too much of a pain. The best way to
keep track of which games are running (or about to be) is the watch the
alt.games.gb newsgroup. It's very low volume, so that should be no problem. The
FAQ gets out of date too quickly and easily in any case.

Once you get a server address and port, use the following examples to connect
you to a game with telnet if you're not using a client. If you're using a
client, simply replace "telnet" with "gbII" or whatever you've named the client
executable in your directory. On Unix: "telnet pooh.caltech.edu 2010" or "telnet
131.215.48.30 2010" or, on VMS: "telnet pooh.caltech.edu /PORT=2010" etc.

Note: Some of these games are chronically off-line for one reason or another;
others are only up at certain (unknown to me) scheduled times. Don't be
surprised if you get a refused connection by more than one game. If you want to
enter one or more of the games that have not started yet, check alt.games.gb for
announcements about where to send your requests.

Other games will be announced in alt.games.gb as they are started, including
periodic "blitz games" run by various people. A blitz game is essentially a gb
game in which the updates are squeezed down into 5 to 20 minute intervals as
opposed to the usual 1 or 2 per day. If you're wondering what an "update" is,
read section III about playing the game.

& 12

Subject: *12. Is there a mailing list for GB?

Yes. This list is made for general conversation about the game.

Please post information about: new games / running games / thoughts / problems /
server ideas / scripts / etc... Or anything else GB related

How to sign up to the Galactic Bloodshed mailing list:

To subscribe to the list, mail a message to majordomo@towerravens.com. The
subject line may be blank but in your message text, type in:
  subscribe gb

Leave the rest of your message blank (remove sigs, etc.)

& 13

Subject: *13. Do I need a client to play GB?

If you're going to play seriously, then the answer is yes. Theoretically, one
could get by using only telnet, but only the client will process maps correctly
and enable you to encrypt your conversations, which is a convenient way to
communicate at no cost without being overheard on the game.

Additionally the newest GB+ server can optionally require CHAP (Challenge
Handshake Authentication Protocol) authentication. If the GB server you connect
to requires this then you will require a client. Right now, only the latest gbII
(2.6.0) supports CHAP authentication.

& 14

Subject 14. How can I start playing a game?

there are two ways to do this. First, you can wait until someone announces the
beginning of a game. The alt.games.gb newsgroup is where you'll see such
announcements. The person in charge of the new game will either include (or
point you to) a racegen program which you can then use to specify what kind of
race you want. Then you log in to the game and start playing when it starts!
Read on for more details on what racegen is and how it works.

Another way to get into a game is to log onto a currently running game and
ask. In most big games, there are "sleepers", or races which have dropped out
for one reason or another (it's not always due to weakness, sometimes time
constraints are involved). Also, many players with big races tend to look for
people to help them out since playing a big race in gb can be very time
consuming.

Games now run with the "governor" code. This allows for races to have one major
leader who can delegate authority over given ships and systems to his governors,
who are independent players recruited by the race leader. This is a great
feature for those of you out there who want to play gb but lack the immense
amount of free time that leading a fully active race requires.

If you see an announcement for a new game starting, but don't want to run your
own race, your best bet is to post to alt.games.gb asking if anyone needs a
governor.

& 15

Subject: 15. How much time does it take to play GB?

That depends entirely on the number of updates per day. For a reasonably large
race (say, control of 40 planets) in a game with 70 star systems or so (3-8
planets per system), it will take you at least one hour of playing time per
update (this is vastly dependent upon how efficient you are...use macros!). this
can go way up if you are actively waging war with another player. This time
tends to increase as the game goes on and you grow in power, but the main
variable in the whole equation is simply how active _you_ want to be. It takes a
very active race to come out in top in gb; even on a one update per day
schedule, it can eat up your time, so consider yourself warned. GB 5.0 HUT
server includes many time saving features, so it is easiest version to play if
time tends to come a problem.

Players who join only to play for a little while and then drop out, leaving all
that they've built to fall into ruin, are generally frowned upon. Sometimes it
is unavoidable, but all deities ask that you plan ahead. Don't get yourself
involved in more than you can handle. Drop-out players who don't get
replacements can seriously upset the game balance, ruining the game for many
other players.

The advent of team races may offset both of these disadvantages, but it's still
best to be aware of them.

& 16

Subject: 16. Is there a newsgroup for GB?

Yes, alt.games.gb

this newsgroup is for discussion of everything that has anything to do with
Galactic Bloodshed, including game announcement, rules discussion, game
editorials, etc.

This is NOT a GAMEBOY group.

There is also alt.games.galatic-bloodshed, which was actually started before
alt.games.gb, however, the name was too long for some UNIXes (at the time) so
the official group was moved to alt.games.gb. this FAQ is cross-posted to that
group, however, alt.games.gb should be used in favor of the other.

& 17

Subject: +17. What is racegen?

Every new game is coming on-line is accepting races generated by a program
called "racegen". Use racegen to generate your race and automatically send it to
the appropriate "deity".

Normally, you'll be asked to use your client to connect to a special racegen
daemon on the eventual gb server machine. this greatly simplifies the old
process of game registration since you don't have to have your own copy of
racegen, just your gb client. Watch for specifics on connecting to the game's
racegen given with new game announcements.

use your gb client or telnet to connect to racegen on server machine then you
are ready to go!

OLD (STANDALONE) RACEGEN NOTES:

If you need your own copy of racegen (highly unlikely), you may still be able to
get a copy from one of the old URLs mentioned above; it compiles pretty easily
on most UNIX systems. Note that you usually have to compile a whole new version
with the proper destination address (for sendmail) in the code, but this is
easy...just find the destination address line (#TO, I believe) in the code and
change the address with your editor, then compile. This standalone racegen is so
rarely needed nowadays that it is not clarified in this FAQ anymore.

& 18

Subject: 18. What race should I choose?

the creation of new races is controlled by the person hosting the game. Player
#1 (the first player enrolled into the game) should always be given deity
status, as many of the game default operations are placed in player #1's
control. Other players may be designated as having deity status during the
enrollment procedure, but this isn't recommended (or needed in most cases).

Race generation is often done using a rather complex point based system, the
idea being that you must spend a limited number of points to get better
attributes. The program that you do this creation process with is called
"racegen". there are five types of data associated with each race that the
player can choose:

* Name, password, and other profile information -- While none of these have any
  direct effect on game play, they add interest. Name and password can be set
  with racegen before enrolling in the game. All of the others can be changed as
  needed; see also: name, personal, profile.

* Home planet type -- A race's home planet can drastically affect its
  game. Jovian home planets are the most costly type, because jovians are huge
  planets with big % the sector area of the universe on them. Jovians are the
  only worlds with gas sectors on them; gas tends to be resource-poor but
  fertile. Class M (Earth-type) home planets are the next most useful, with a
  good balance of fertility and resources. Forest and water worlds are like
  class M's and generally more fertile, but they are also smaller on
  average. Desert worlds have high resource content but are not very
  fertile. Iceballs and airless worlds are too small to make good home planets,
  but they are very common in the universe as a whole.

* Racial type -- There are two main racial types in GB: normal races (think of
  humans, Klingons, Wookies, Pierson's Pupeteers, etc.) and metamorphs (Alien,
  the Thing, body snatchers, etc.). The primary difference between these two
  race classes is that only metamorphs may have pods. A secondary difference
  that is rather harder to notice is that the price of various attributes
  combinations is slightly different for normals and morphs in racegen,
  especially for some of the attribute's extremes.

* Compats -- The planets found in the GB universe are represented as arrays of
  sectors of various types: ice, land, sea, etc. Various races may have varying
  degrees of compatibility with these sector types, which will affect the amount
  of population they can grow on that sector types, and other things too.

* Attributes -- Attributes are quantizations of a race's abilities. Currently
  there are 11 basic attributes for each race:

** Absorption -- Only metamorphs may have this attribute, which allows them to
   absorb enemy troops and civilians in combat if the morph wins. Combined with
   pods, it allows metamorphs to replace alien population on planets when pods
   burst.

** Adventurism -- This describes how willing a sector's population is to move
   and explore other sectors. High values tend to settle planets on their own
   far more efficiently. If you have a low value, you can order movements with
   the 'move' option.

** Birthrate -- This factor determines how rapidly the population in the sector
   will converge to the maximum population supportable on there. High values
   mean that the population multiplies faster.

** Fertilize -- This attribute represents the percentage chance that a race will
   increase by one percent the fertility of any sector it owns. Any race may
   take advantage of space plows for a similar effect, once it gets to tech
   level 5.

** Fighting Ability -- High values mean that the race is more likely to kill an
   alien than a lower value. Races with lower values will usually need to have
   larger forces to win in direct combat over a high fighting ability. It is
   important to note that this affects only land combat and ship boarding
   strengths, and not ship to ship fighting.

** IQ -- The raw growth rate of a race's technology is governed by the race's
   intelligence. the technology increase per update is IQ / 100. Additional
   technology gain is available by technology investments on the individual
   planets under the race's control.

** Collective IQ; IQ Limit -- The intelligence of a race with collective IQ is
   related to the race's total population, as follows: IQ = IQ_limit * [(2 / PI)
   * arctan(population / 50000)] ^2. (Note: be careful with this one! If you
   can't build pods, then having a collective IQ could be disastrous as you
   won't have the know how to build *any* kind of useful ships for a looooong
   time.)

** Mass -- Each race has a mass. The heavier the individual, the more fuel it
   will take to launch and land ships full of the race.

** Metabolism -- This value controls how industrious the race is. Higher
   metabolism races will produce resources more rapidly than lower metabolisms,
   and also increase the efficiency of sectors faster.

** Pods -- Pods are small ships, available only to metamorphs but at tech level
   0, buildable instantly on the surface of planets. Each one may carry a single
   crew-thing; this makes them ideal for settling other planets. Pods which
   enter a system after having frozen in deep space will warm and eventually
   burst, possibly leading to spores landing on worlds in the new system. If a
   spore lands on a sector, a ton or more of biomass will be created, resulting
   in a new colony for the podding race. Note that spores may neve land on alien
   occupied sectors unless the podding race has absorption.

** Sexes -- Each race has a number of sexes. This represents the minimum
   population that a sector must have in order to be able to reproduce. Lower
   values are preferable to high values for colonization efforts. It is not
   recommended to have more than 3 to 6 sexes at the outside, unless you are
   really looking for a challenge.

& 19

Subject: 19. What's the difference between a normal and a morph?

A "morph", or "metamorph", is described in the standard docs as the type of race
you'd see in John Carpenter's "The Thing". the major differences between morphs
and normals can be summarized like this:
  -- Morphs can absorb enemy bodies when they attack a sector
  -- Morphs can build spore pods on planetary surfaces
  -- Morphs' IQ is determined only by their population

It used to be the case that morphs had a very high metabolism and very high
fighting strength to go along with all of this, but the advent of racegen has
changed that considerably. Now, morphs can have all of the basic characteristics
of normal races -- but the three attributes mentioned above are only available
to metamorphs. The disadvantage offsets this option is that some items will be
more expensive in racegen.

I'll discuss these three items in reverse order: First, morph IQ is based on
some exponential population formula. In all games, this means their IQ starts at
0, and the maximum possible morph IQ can be set by the player in racegen. A
common practice is for morphs to spend a great deal of tax money investing in
tech to offset this disadvantage, but it still takes a while to "take off". The
low IQ means that morphs cannot rely on shuttles (which require some minor tech
ability to build) to ferry them around to colonize planets early in the
game. Morphs, however, have the ability to build spore pods. These pods require
no tech to build and are very cheap.

The major advantage to spore pods is this low cost and the fact that they can be
built right on the planet's surface (while most other ship types require
factories which need resources to be turned on and time to repair before
actually building ships). The drawbacks to pods are that they are slow and that
they explode upon entering star systems. That's not _always_ a drawback, but
early in the game, it will mean that several pods must be sent to a system in
order for you to have a good chance at landing morphs on a planet or two. The
success rate of spore pods (i.e. whether they explode harmlessly or result in a
colony) varies from game to game from 20% to 40%.

The other major difference between morphs and normals which is mentioned above
is morph's special combat ability. If a morph attack force defeats another race
in ground combat, a large fraction of the defeated enemy will be "absorbed" by
the attacking morph race, enabling morphs to actually _increase_ their
population through attacking. Thus, late in the game when all planets are
covered and well-defended by other races, morphs sill have a chance to do some
serious damage by showering an enemy system with pods and perhaps landing enough
morphs in the system to cause a lot of problems, if not to take over a planet or
two.

& 20

Subject: 20. Which is better, morphs or normals?

This is debatable. Each race type has its own advantages and drawbacks. It also
depends upon the modifications made for the particular game you are
in. Generally, each race type can be led to success by a good player, and
alliances between morphs and normals are quite common and can be very effective
(since the normals generally have the high tech levels while morph's pod
launching ability and generally high metabolism and/or fighting strength can
help the alliance).

& 21

Subject: 21. What kind of planet should I choose?

this is covered in large part in the above racegen docs, but I can make some
comments about common questions that arise. Of all types of planets, class M's
are chosen for homeworlds around 75% of the time. this is because they are the
largest of any type planet except Jovians. Thus, they can support a high
population (for taxation and tech purposes), and they usually have a fairly high
number of resources. Another common choice is desert, since it is on the same
order of size as a class M planet. Deserts have more resources, but are less
fertile and are rarer in some games than class M's (also, you should take 100%
desert as a sector preference, which means you can't spend as much on the other,
more common, sector types).

Big planets have two big advantages:
1) The larger the planet, the faster you will produce resources from it once you
   have covered the planet. So the more sectors you have, the better. Races that
   select small home planets tend to get left behind early on in the race to
   build the first ships for this reason.
2) The planet is much harder to conquer. Even if an enemy manages to field a
   temporarily superior force to your planetary population, odds are he won't
   have the AP's necessary to take the whole thing in one update, so you have
   time to marshal reinforcements if you're in a bind.

Here's a brief summary of the various planet types. The relative sizes of each
of these planets, as well as the benefits (and % of races which choose each type
of planet, etc.)

! Will vary from game to game !

When using racegen, you'll typically pay (or get a bonus) for the type of planet
you choose to start with, and the deity will try his best to see that your
points are fairly spent.

Class M -- These planets are usually about 60% water, 20% land, and an even mix
of everything else. Once in a while, you'll find a class M with an abnormal
atmosphere (like heavy in methane content).

Jovian -- These planets are 100% gaseous, and they are usually twice as large as
the typical class M planet. They tend to be very high in fertility, too, so you
can easily build up a large population for taxation and tech purposes. Also,
ships in orbit around Jovians add fuel to their holds every update (tankers are
twice as efficient at this), so even if you're not a Jovian-type race, having
one of these nearby can be a tremendous asset.

Water -- These are largely water planets, and I've found that they are generally
resource poor. They can be quite large, ranging up in size to class M quality,
but they are usually about 40% smaller. On some versions there is also mountain
sectors. That will raise the resource depository a lot.

Desert -- These planets are usually 80% desert and 15% mtn/land. They are _very_
nice as far as resource content is concerned, and their size range is much like
Class M planets.

Forest -- These planets are almost entirely covered in forest, which is the
rarest sector type. Resource content is fairly good. Size range is between Water
planets and Class M's. Fertility is higher than on a normal class M.

Iceball -- These planets are generally small (1/5 the size of class M's or
less), and they consist of around 75% ice and 25% monutain. Relative to their
size they are resource rich, but the small number of sectors means that
resources will come more slowly.

Airless -- These planets are mostly land (75%) with some mountain and ice
sectors. The atmosphere is almost always hostile, of course, but these planets
are probably the most resource rich relative to their size (i.e. 1/3 the res of
a typical class M but 1/5 the size).

Asteroid -- These are just floating rocks in space, not good for a heck of a
lot. They don't count as planets in victory conditions, and they usually have
very few resources, and the small number of sectors make it very difficult for
most asteroids to ever contribute to your cause, though having colonies on them
have other advantages, such as morale bonus. Sector types are random but range
among land, desert, ice and mountain.

& 22

Subject: 22. What sector preferences should I take?

The most common sector types besides gas is water, but that is misleading since
there are so many water sectors on Class M's (in addition to those on waterball
planets). Running a close second is land terrain, which is found on just about
every planet type. Forest is probably the lease common, making it an unusual and
often strategic addition to your list of preferences (remember, you pay for both
the % compatibility and an overhead cost for each of your sector
prefs). Mountain is convenient to have since it is usually high in resource
content and found in small amounts on many planets, and ice is also a common
choice.

I've noticed that taking a combination of desert and a choice of mountain, land
and/or ice in your sector prefs somehow entices the server into making your race
a "methane breather" some of the time (or maybe it's just bad luck). The problem
with this is that most planets will be extremely incompatible with your race,
meaning your pop will grow very slowly and often leave you vulnerable to
invasion. You'll find yourself at a rather large disadvantage until such time as
you or an ally can build atmospheric processors (at a pretty high tech level, so
takes a while). Some games (with my strong approval) are phasing out the
possibility of methane breathing races except by request.

This is not to say that you should always choose water, land, and mountain as
your sector prefs. In many cases, alliances are made based on sector
incompatibility. In other words, a morph who loves water and forest would rather
ally with a desert/mountain/land loving normal than another water loving normal,
so don't be afraid to choose an unusual sector type. It may enable you to
exploit planets which other races wouldn't mind giving away.

& 23

Subject: 23. What happens if I get a rotten home planet?

As it says in the help docs, a good home planet or system can really make or
break your race. In some games, the deity actually goes around before the game
and manually sets up everyone so that they can more or less start off on an
equal footing. If this isn't happening, though, and you start with a crummy
planet, be ready to fight your way out of it. This makes it all the more
important that you establish yourself through both your system and the
surrounding ones. Look on it as a challenge.

& 24

Subject: *24. How can I get a postscript map?

"psmap" is a program written in C which, given the output of your race's "stars"
command, will produce a nice looking PostScript map which looks really peachy
keen on laser printers.

GBII USERS:
The most recent version of gbII (2.6.0) comes with psmap built in. To use it
simply type 'psmap'. the output of gbII's psmap is a bit keener than the
original stand-alone psmap. Users of the gbII client will find this a snappy
feature.

HOW TO OBTAIN THE PROGRAM:
You can download the file containing the actual PSMAP code form the GB-page at
address <http://www.hut.fi/rauta/gbhtml/others/psmap.c> (you may need to grab it
from a web archive). How the actual downloading happens depends on your favorite
netbrowser. Please do notice the file you will be downloading is a source code
written in C.

HOW TO COMPILE:
(The following instructions should work at least in Unix-environments!)
To turn psmap.c-sourcefile to executable program you need to compile it. The
following syntax (or one which closely resembles it) in unix-shell should do the
trick:
  cc -o psmap psmap.c
It will produce you an executable file names psmap. Please do remember you could
use your favorite C-compiler (like gcc) instead of cc.

HOW TO MAKE POSTSCRIPT MAP:
This one has two phases: 1) to get star-listing from the server and 2) to turn
that listing to the postscript format by using the program you just compiled.

PHASE 1:
You need to get the output of "stars"-command from the server. The easiest way
to do it is to log it into file (You are using the client, aren't you?) by
typing after client prompt: stars > star.list This will produce a file named
star-list to your unix-directory. This star.list should look something like
this:

GB II Log File: Wed Feb 19 09:30:44 1997

( 0)                Bambi (       0,       0)  108676
( 1)               Fomori (  -27761,    9231)   88864
( 2)                Indus (  -29082,  -10185)  107207
( 3)             Callisto (    5868,   31080)   87259
( 4)               Tammuz (  -27412,  -14362)  111664
( 5)              Ascella (  -29025,    8470)   89218
( 6)            Hofstader (  -41276,   35805)   59642

[The rest is deleted]

PHASE 2:
You should give starlist as input to your psmap-program which you could by
typing in the unix shell the command:
  psmap 1 <star.list> psmap1.ps
or
  psmap 2 <star.list> psmap2.ps
The command does process the listing of stars in file star.list and it will
generate a postscript file named psmap1.ps or psmap2.ps. The difference between
these two cases is: with argument 1 you get a neat map with circles around your
homesystem at 50000 unit intervals (good for judging distances from your home
system). With argument 2 you get a plain map with just the names of the
stars. psmap1.ps or psmap2.ps should look something like this:

%!PS-Adobe-2.0

0.5 72 mul 10.5 72 mul translate
/drawcircle
{
  newpath 0 360 arc stroke
}
def

/drawstar
{
  /starname exch def
  /ypos exch def
  /xpos exch def
  xpos ypos 2 drawcircle
  4 xpos add ypos moveto
  starname show
}
def

[The rest is deleted again]

HOW TO PRINT IT:
Just print it with your postscript-printer. If you don't know how to prin it try
to become acquainted with lpr-command or its equivalent (man lpr). If you still
have problems just contact your system administrator.

HOW TO USE YOUR NEWLY PURCHASED PS-MAP:
It will help you outline the form of the galaxy and help you to contact other
races...Just kill 'em all!

& 25

Subject: 25. What is a move seg?

A move seg (or movement segment) is a procedure during which the server updates
the positions of all ships in the game based on their current orders. For
example, if you have a ship ordered to move toward a particular star, planet or
ship, this process moves your ship closer based upon the ship's speed. You'll
receive messages from the server when you arrive at your destination, at which
time your ship stops moving.

Repairs also occur at move segs. This means that every time there is a move seg,
any of your ships which are currently trying to repair themselves, regardless of
how they incurred damage, will have their damage percent reduced by some
amount. For more information on how to repair ships and so forth, see the help
docs.

& 26

Subject: 26. What is an update?

An update is a "glorified move seg". Basically, everything that happens in a
move set happens here PLUS the following:
  - Production occurs at your colonies
  - Ships attempting hyperspace jumps either jump or charge in increments toward
    a level where they can jump.

What this translates to is this: The pace of the game depends almost entirely on
how often these updates occur. There will always be a given number of move segs
(usually anywhere from 2 to 6) between updates, but updates are the real pulse
of the game. Also, you should note that the period right after updates is
usually when the most frantic action in the game takes place.

This is important when choosing what game you wish to play in. For example, if
you live over in Europe and the update schedule is such that updates always
occur at 4 am from you, you might want to pass on the game. If you aren't on at
updates, enemies often get the chance of jump into your system and start
attacking while you aren't on to defend yourself. This can have disastrous
effects.

& 27

Subject: 27. What strategy should I use?

This sounds like a pretty hairy question, but I will try to answer this in a
limited fashion for beginners. What you're basically looking for is some
simple-minded strategy that will get you through the first 20-30 updates while
you're still learning the ropes of the game. Try to follow these two basic
principles: Produce and colonize. Your first and foremost need is to produce
resources on your home planet so that you can start building ships. The fastest
way to start producing is to spread out and cover your home planet as quickly as
possible. This will be the sum total of your turns for the first several
updates.

Once you have resources, you get to start building ships. If you're a
metamorphic race, that means you get to build pods. This is something you should
do as soon as you get resources. this is one of the major advantages of playing
a morph...pod-building ability. the nice thing about pods is that you don't need
factories to build them, which means they can be built on the ground and
launched immediately. Since pods are slow relative to most ships, however, it is
imperative that you launch them quickly so that you have a fighting chance to
win the race to all of the unoccupied systems.

If you're a normal race, you should build a factory as soon as possible and then
modify it so that it can start producing cheap shuttles. After you've played a
game, you'll realize why it is so important to win the race toward unoccupied
planets: it is far, far easier to take an unoccupied planet than to kick a
hostile race off that planet.

the best advice I've heard yet is that you should be sure to understand the
commands in the game so you can use them to your full advantage! It takes time
and experience to learn the game, and it will be a rewarding and fun experience
if you approach it in the right way.

& 28

Subject: 28. How do I change scope?

that's the cs command. Scope works just like directory trees in Unix. If you
want to go to the top (Universe) level, you type "cs /". To go to a given
planet, you'd type "cs /starname/planetname". To change scope to one level
higher, you use "cs ..".

& 29

Subject: 29. How do I talk to others?

There are three basic ways:

br - This broadcasts a message that will appear on all active player screens
except those players with a "gag" in place (you can see that in the who
list). On HAP, if you broadcast, only those players who know something about
your race will be able to "translate" your broadcast or your messages (see
send).

ann - This is the same as broadcast, except that it limits your audience to
those players in the same stellar scope as you. This is a good way to carry on a
more sensitive conversation, but there's no way to be sure whether you're being
overheard.

send - This sends a telegram to the named player at the cost of 1 AP. There is
no cost for communicating this way with the game deity. There is also a "cr"
command available with the gbII client, but it is discussed in the client Help
just fine.

& 30

Subject: 30. What should I do first?

Once you get into the game and have connected using your password (and your
governor password, if applicable), type "help". Read through all of the concept
listed first and then branch out form there. You'll find some topics in the main
list have no help files listed. The docs always tend to suffer from game
advances which outpace anyone's ability to update them, but they are definitely
useful for the basics.

& 31

Subject: 31. How do I interpret the maps?

Well, the stellar system maps and the galaxy map should be pretty simple to
figure out. Object on the map which are darkened completely are those in which
you have people, either on ships or planets. Objects which are partially
darkened are those which you have data for but no people present.

The planetary map is a grid. When you refer to a given sector, be sure to use
(column, row) and not vice-versa. If your toggle switches (see "help toggle")
are set in the default way, the highlighted sectors are those with your people
on them. Any sectors with numbers on them represent sectors occupied by other
players. Sectors with letters or symbols on them imply the presence of a ship
with that symbol. Also as a part of the map, it lists how many sectors on the
planet you own, whether any aliens are present on the planet, what your
population is, the planetary compatibility (which depends upon atmosphere and
temperature), and a few other things that you can look up in the help docs...it
changes from game to game.

& 32

Subject: 32. How do factories work?

Well, first you build one, then you cs to it by typing "cs". Next, you use the
modify command to get everything just the way you want it, from ship type, to
crew capacity, etc. Once it is the "perfect" design for you, type "order on". It
will take a few updates for the F's damage level to go from 75 down to 0, and
you can only build ships (with the build command) at F's which are
undamaged. Once you've turned a factory on, you can't change the basic design of
the ship, so plan carefully! you can modify the ship later at double the cost
differential (which is new cost - original cost) provided you can fit the
necessary resources into the cargo bay of your ship. this means that ships with
0 cargo capacity cannot be modified.

& 33

Subject: 33. What tax rate should I set?

After you've covered the planet and are on the verge of building ships, start it
off with a few percent. This may vary depnding on your race, but I think it is a
good rule of thumb. this small amount will pay for your ships and keep you from
losing morale. Later on, when you're not so worried about increasing your sector
efficiencies, you can up the tax rate (but watch out for insurgencies!). Note
that the higher the tax rate, the less chance you have to increase in
efficiency, and the average.

& 34

Subject: 34. What's the difference between military and civilians?

Civilians have a fighting strength equal to your race's fight. Military have a
fighting strength 10 times stronger than your civilians. Contrary to what you
might think, military _cannot_ pilot ships _or_ fire guns...only civilians can
do that. Thus, if you have 5 guns on your explorer and 2 mil and 3 crew, you
will only be able to fire 3 guns at a time. Also, if you have only mil on board
a given ship (i.e. your only civ on board gets killed by a lucky shot from an
enemy), you cannot order the ship to any destination.

& 35

Subject: 35. What should I set my mobilization level at?

I've found that it's a good idea to mobilize only a few very large planets you
may own. The reasoning for this is long and involved, but you'll learn through
experience that mobilizing small planets (as opposed to building weapons plants
there) only makes them more vulnerable to a metamorph invasion force. Mobilizing
big planets still leaves you vulnerable to a ground assault (your high mob
allows enemy troops to arm just as easily as you can if they bring their own
destruct and absorb a few hundred civilians, for example), but big planets
require a lot of APs to take and require a lower mobilization in order for
planetary guns to come into effect.

Another popular method is set mobilization level to 100 everywhere. This will
increase your destruction production so high, that you don't need any weapons
plants and save a lot of resources. You can also easily arm defending military
round your empire.

& 36

Subject: 36. How do planetary guns work?

You don't have to load them. These guns will take destruct directly from your
stockpiles (provided you have some dest there). You can actively use them
against ships in orbit around your planet by using the "defend" command (in the
help files). These guns will also _automatically_ fire on any non-allied ship
that tries to land on your planet...even a couple of medium caliber planetary
guns is better than nothing. Also, the ship may not be destroyed, but if it is
damaged, there is a chance it will crash land, thwarting the attack. You get a
certain number of planetary guns proportional to how many sectors you own on the
planet and how high the mob level is.

& 37

Subject: 37. How do atmosphere processors work?

To put it simply, it doesn't matter who builds a processor...only who currently
owns it. A processor will slowly change the atmosphere of a planet (rate
inversely proportional to planet size) to the ideal preferences of the owner of
the processor at a cost of 3 fuel per update, which must be loaded into the
processor. The last time I checked, processors will continue to eat up 3 fuel
per turn if they have fuel to burn even after a given planet is perfectly
atmospherically compatible with the owner, so it's a good idea to scrap
processors once you reach this goal.

& 38

Subject: 38. What's the quickest way to jump to other systems?

Since you receive jump technology level, your best bet is to have a ship ready
to modify once you get there. If you're going to build a large fleet of jump
ships, you'll save a lot of res by just building a factory and starting it up
AFTER you've been able to design the ship with jump included. Some players,
through, prefer using a few heavily armed explorers which they modify for
jumping as soon as they can, saving a few updates by not having to wait for a
factory to come online.

& 39

Subject: 39. how do I get hyperdrive on board ships?

In order to get hyperdrive aboard ships such as e's and d's, you must first have
a given number of resources in the cargo bay. The amount depends upon the new
cost of the ship with hyperdrive minus the old cost (double that to get the cost
of the upgrade). That means you must be able to fit that many resources
_on_board_ your ship to make the upgrade. For e's, big cargo holds aren't very
common, so you might find that you have to "bootstrap" your way up by upgrading
the size of your cargo hold. See the "upgrade" command in the help files for
more info. In case the help files aren't very enlightening, her's an example of
how to build a jump capable destroyer:

> land d 2,2 (let's say this gives you d #1456 in sector 2,2)
> load #1456 r
> cs #1456
> upgrade hyper (now you've got hyperdrive capability)
> load #1456 r (assume you want to add a crystal mount)
> upgrade mount (now when you jump, you'll do it in one update, and you'll use a
_lot_ less fuel, if you've got a crystal in the mount, of course)
> load #1456 x 1 (assuming you have a crystal on the planet)
> mount #1456 (now you can take advantage of your xtal mount)

Say I wanted to increase the hanger capacity of my d, here's how I would do it:

> cs #1456
> load #1456 r
> upgrade hanger 6

& 40

Subject: 40. How do I build ships in space?

Well, the way to do this is get a ship into orbit with the resources you
need. You can use just about any ship, but a shuttle works just fine. You can
load it with an infinite number of resources, but you just can't land an
overloaded shuttle...so you _don't_ need ships with huge cargo bays to build
some of the larger structures like H's, O's, S', etc.

You can get resources onto the shuttle by ferrying them up from the surface with
another ship. Once you have done that, change scope to your shuttle, and type
"build". This will create a new ship docked to your shuttle. you can then launch
it or do whatever you want with it (but be careful about trying to land damaged
ships! some ships are built with a certain damage level that must be
repaired...others can't land at all).

& 41

Subject: 41. How come I don't have any resources yet?

Often, races with low metabolisms and/or small homeworlds or worse, a
combination of the two, will take painfully long to start generating any
resources. You can help alleviate this problem by buying a reasonably high
metabolism. I usually find that 1.0 gets me off fairly quickly, but if I have
the points to spend, I'll go higher. High metab isn't so crucial for Jovian
races since they start with huge homeworlds, so this minimum could go down
around 0.85 or so, in my opinion.

& 42

Subject: 42. My pods didn't explode when they reached their destination.

Speaking from personal experience only, pods can explode at an update or a move
seg. The chance of this happening for each pod at each update/segment is around
25%. Thus, if your pods arrive at a system, go ahead and set them on course for
nearby planets. Some might actually get there before exploding, giving you a new
colony in the early parts of the game.

& 43

Subject: 43. How do I get a list of where my crystals are?

Once you have at crystaltech, you'll be able to see the location of all crystal
sectors on planets you have explored. At times, these sectors will be covered by
structures built by you or something else (such as F's, a's, Y's, etc.), but you
can get around that problem by using "toggle geography" and then viewing the
map.

& 44

Subject: 44. How do I get crystals?

If you occupy any crystal sectors, you have a chance, depending upon that
sector's efficiency, to mine a crystal at every update. Once you've mined from
around 1-6 crystals from a given sector over time, it will revert to a "normal"
sector.

& 45

Subject: 45. How do I get a list of ship types I can build?

Try "build ?" which is described under the "help build". this will give you a
summary of ship types. If you want detailed info on a specific ship, type "build
? x" where x is the letter that represents that ship type.

& 46

Subject: 46. What are the worst mistakes I may do?

NEWBIES DEADLY SINS IN GB

What are the worst and most lethal mistakes a newbie player might do while
trying to survive among more experienced players?

  * Remember destruction.
    You need des if you want to shoot a gun. Destroyer with 15 guns is totally
    useless if it doesn't have any destruction to shoot. When you build mine or
    missile in factory it's still empty and you have to LOAD DESTRUCTION
    in. Empty missiles/mines will not do any damage.

  * Don't overestimate the value of victory/powerlist.
    Even if you are above someone else in victory list it doesn't mean that you
    are more powerful for sure. There is lot of things that affects your
    standings in that list. Jovian players will usually take early leads because
    they have lot of population and a large homeplanet. Deserters tend to take
    the last seats, since they are very poor in population. Still deserter might
    be more powerful (with the highest resource depository and good production
    rate) than that list leading jovian. Vic list begins to show some true
    information somewhere after update 30. But it will NOT EVER reach the status
    of absolute truth.

  * Don't sit on your resource.
    Key words are explore and expand. It is lot easier to take over empty planet
    than 10 updates later try to kick another player out from there.

  * Inhabit all compatible sectors, even if population can't survive on
    them. When you find an empty planet, all sector efficiencies are 0. That
    means low fertility sectors (like desert, mountain) can't feed your people
    (^pop = 0). But if you inhabit a sector anyway, it's efficiency and perhaps
    even fertility will rise. Second generation most likely will survive now. If
    you just sit and wait, you can be sure that someone else comes and takes
    it. (NOTE: compatible sectors only).

  * Remember cargo room.
    Most ships have some damage when they come out from factory. And they need
    loaded resources to repair. If you modify all cargo space out, your ships
    won't ever repair themselves. and believe me...50% damaged destroyer or
    light carrier IS USELESS. (NOTE: in GB 5.0 HUT this is not important since
    ship repair can use planetary stockpile, but it's in GB 5.0 HUT only).

  * The FIRST set of the game is to all your APs to colonize the compatible
    sectors on your home planet (You will probably own your whole home planet
    before you get the 50r for a factory)

  * It is (almost) never a good idea to build default ships.
    Modify some parts smaller and some parts larger depending on what you intend
    to do with the ship. Knowing exactly what to modify takes
    experience. Important: the default shuttle has 2 hanger space. Get rid of
    it. You shouldn't use a shuttle with hanger space for exploration.

  * Sending shuttles to every system within 50K is probably a good idea. They
    will typically arrive before you reach hyperdrive (with a techie race). If
    you are playing morph, the suggested distance may be a bit larger. There may
    still be empty planets available by the time your shuttles arrive. Empty
    planets are much easier to colonize than full ones.

  * Do not underestimate the power of domes.
    On anything but a jovian planet (or possibly an airless or ice homeworld),
    you can even consider put one dome on every sector.

  * Note that you can start repairing factories before you have the technology
    for them (with the exception of "discoveries" like hyperdrive, crystals,
    lasers, and CEWs). This means most ships can be designed for higher tech
    than you currently have. (If not playing a collective IQ race, this is *at
    least* 3 * IQ + current tech if factories are build with 75% damage); (with
    a collective IQ race, just look at your tech gain last update and multiply
    by 3. Your tech in 3 updates will be higher than this unless your race is
    rapidly being destroyed.)

  * Don't build quarries.
    If resource depository is not infinite quarry will be just a waste of
    resources. And it is bad investment even if depository is infinite.

  * Take 100% sector preferences. Less than 40% preferences are almost
    useless. they will not produce resources quickly enough to have any use for
    you. And resos are what you need to build ships and enlarge your empire. So
    it's much MUCH better to have 2-3 100% sectortypes than 5-6 less than 40%
    sectortypes.

& 47

Subject: 47. Final warnings and advice

If you see a bug, tell the deity in charge. Period. Many games are thrown out of
balance by players who find bugs and exploit them. If you're really in this to
have fun and play the game well, you shouldn't need to cheat to win. You can use
the 'bug' command to report bugs you find.

Remember that some types of ships are built with damage that takes a few updates
to repair. This means that you'll have to plan ahead, and, more importantly,
don't try to land these or any other damaged ships unless you want to risk
losing them! You have a percentage chance equal to the ships damage of crash
landing and possibly destroying your ship!

Use the "tactical" command often to check for the presence of enemy ships which
may not show up on your map. Remember, to check an entire system for enemies, it
might be better to do a "tact g" rather than just a "tact". this gives tactical
reports for your planets only (which is still full coverage most of the time)
and avoids repetitive tact reports from every single one of your ships in the
system. Also, be careful what orders you give in Universal Scope (the top
level)...sometimes, asking for tact reports from all of your ships (or even just
stock reports) can tie up the game and waste a lot of everyone's time.

Remember that some types of ships can't be built in factories, most importantly
ships such as Stations and Habitats. To build something like this, you can
overload a shuttle in orbit! Also, be sure you know what the rules are for
Habitats in your game (i.e. do they produce extra resource every turn? If so how
many?).

If you're got "smart guns", learn how to use them and take advantage of them!
Don't get caught offline at an update only to have everything you hold dear
destroyed simply because you didn't set up a protection network.

The beginning of the game is critical time when you need to get your race
started off and several update occur very close together in order to get things
moving. When you sign up for a game, be sure you can make this first update
"blitz" or you may find yourself hopelessly behind.

    ************************ I M P O R T A N T ************************
     Finally, remember that the deity of the game is there to help you.
       If it weren't for him/her, you wouldn't be playing GB at all.
           So don't whine. Be polite. Make constructive comments.
                   It'll be easier for everyone that way.
    ************************ I M P O R T A N T ************************

                     *** RELAX. IT IS ONLY A GAME. ***

& 48

Subject: 48. Advice from veterans

Galactic Bloodshed FAQ Version 4.4 - Part 2 of 2

this posting serves as an appendix to the alt.games.gb FAQ sheet. It has a
series of ten questions asked to several gb veterans by Mike Varney and their
responses. These questions and their responses are designed for novice
players. They don't cover many aspects of the game, but they can be very
helpful. Unlike the first posting of the FAQ, this one is unlikely to change
over time.

Editorial comment:
* These answers are not all necessarily right. There may be several misleading
  and some totally wrong answers in here, so take these with a grain of
  salt. These strategies are not foolproof.
* As you will see from the wide range of answers for each question, everyone has
  their own playing style and own opinions on how newbies should proceed.
* A balanced view of the game, in light of all the different viewpoints, is
  hopefully presented.
* The original responses were edited where necessary to make them more readable,
  either in slightly rewording a vague sentence, making the format more
  readable, changing grammar here and there, et.c

  In sum...you have been warned.

Legend of shorthand used by respondents:

  GB Name         Real Name            GB Name     Real Name
  -------         ---------            -------     ---------
  Feepness        Christopher Fodor    NB          ???
  Lestat          Kevin Martin         TheCulture  Petri Wessman
  Keskiolut       Toni Kotinurmi       Froos       Jerry Liu
  Neue Regel      Derek Jewhurst       Griffons    Paul Daniels
  Garfel          Jari Koivikko        Pillarian   Scott Donavan
  ???             Rob Nesius           Tao         Jukka Sinisalo
  Thing           David Fernandez      Empire      Samuli Suomi
  Muu             Dan Andersen         ???         Link Baker
  Fnebish Legion  Doug Ingram          Greenies    Mitch Ferguson
  Microbians      Jason W. Solinsky    Zurgithian  Mike Simmonds
  Tribbles        Shire

& 49

Subject: 49. Should I choose a metamorphic race or a normal race?

  Feepness -
    Normal for me. With high IQ, and try to max metabolism.

  Lestat -
    Metas are more workd because they are able to send pods out fairly early in
    the game. Typically, they will have a large number of pods out at most
    times. Since they need to get ahead early, you really have to pay attention
    to them.

  Keskiolut -
    Whatever, not too specialized race is the main point. If you have a
    specialized race, you MUST know what you're doing.

  Neue Regel -
    Normal

  Garfel -
    I prefer normal 'cause I get lot of tech.

  Rob Nesius -
    The concept of a 'normal' race might be more comfortable for a newbie. There
    are a number of pros and cons to consider. The normal races, also referred
    to as 'techies', start out with their IQ at a high number. Their tech then
    increases roughly at a rate of IQ / 100. Which means it grows at a linear
    rate. Morphs' intelligence, on the other hand, is based on their
    population. So, before a Morph can increase it's tech, it must increase it's
    population. In consideration of this, Morphs have the ability to build
    'pods' at zero tech, and launch them to other planet, thus letting them
    expand throughout their home systems at a comparable rate to the
    'techies'. Morph's usually have a higher 'fight' than 'normals'. It is
    possible for Morphs and Techies to be allies. The game is not 'morphs'
    against 'techies'.

  Thing -
    If you want to get the higher tech toys first, get a normal race with a high
    int; otherwise, a meta is a better choice. They start out slow but can catch
    up quickly.

  Muu -
    Well, as a newbie, I would start as a normal race. They get a technological
    advantage over the meta's right from the start. They are also much more
    straight forward to play. Meta's can get very complex and very
    time-consuming in the beginning. Also, Normal's tend to attempt to enslave
    Meta's as soon as possible. Therefore, if you are not very experience, you
    will not be able to keep a Meta as a free empire.

  Fnebish Legion -
    Choose metamorphs if you want to concentrate more on ground fighting and a
    more dynamic (and time-consuming) game. Choose a normal race if you'd rather
    experiment with building ship types, with the ultimate goal of finding a
    good metamorphic ally to do the "dirty work" for you. Both types of races
    can just as easily win the game, and they're both just as difficult to learn
    how to play well.

  Microbians -
    You can have fun with both types of races. I've always found the HAP racegen
    to favor normal races and the GB racegen to favor metamorphs, but the
    universe will always need a mixture of both. In my experience metamorphs
    have represented a considerably greater time consumption than normals, so
    you should take this into account. (of course any race will take a long time
    if you occupy much of the galaxy). On the GB racegen you can create some
    interesting crosses between metamorphs and normals (like races with
    collective IQ's but neither pods nor absorb). Most of these combinations are
    disastrous, but others (like a collective IQ, no pods Jovian) can be both
    interesting AND playable.

  Tribbles -
    I would suggest a normal race, they tend to have less ship to worry about,
    and a lot less complications. A meso to be effective must know about tech
    investments, how to maximize population, and uses of pods.

  NB -
    If you want to explore all the nifty ship types of the game, I would suggest
    you not be a metamorph. Also, being a metamorph successfully requires either
    tireless fingers or an understanding of macros!

  TheCulture -
    Depends on whether you want to side with the "Techs" or the
    "Morphs"...Metamorphs can build pods very early in the game, so they get a
    head start on the normal races, who have to wait until they can build a
    shuttle to get off their home world. Morphs have a collective IQ, which
    means that in the beginning their technology level will increase *very*
    slowly. Since your tech level determines what kind of whiz-bang stuff you
    can build, it will take a while until your average Morph race gets its first
    shuttle up in the air. Things even out later in the game.

  Froos -
    Depends on your playing strategy. If you enjoy spending a lot of time
    playing with ships and fleets I'd choose normal. If you don't want to spend
    a heck a lot of time and don't mind spending your time on planet surfaces,
    choose morph.

  Griffons -
    It really depends on the game that you are playing...If you are playing in
    one of the Clarkson games it is a must. With the HAP games you really aught
    to start out with a tech race. Choosing a normal race will allow you to
    build better ships earlier, in general, while the meta races tend to allow
    you to have nice things like higher fighting capability, etc. With the
    Clarkson enrolling system the meta's are the strongest races, you can make a
    meta with the same characteristics as a top line normal cheaper, giving you
    more points to use for increasing your abilities.

  Pillarian -
    This is entirely up to individual tastes, if you are just starting then flip
    a coin...try that type then next game swap...then perhaps make a decision as
    to what you will play...

  Tao -
    I'd say normal. If for no other reason but because many don't like them...

  Empire -
    It depends on which tactic you are going to use: if you want to be good in
    man to am-fight, choose meta (because of absorption), if you want fast
    developing tech from the very beginning of the game, choose normal (with IQ
    like 170...) and so on...

  Link Baker -
    I have only played metamorphic races. I like the fact that they can send
    pods immediately and don't have to wait for tech. They are more
    challenging. You don't have the technology of a normal race. Also, you can
    take a planet without having to destroy it (absorb). That takes
    skill. Anyone can bomb someone into the stone age.

  Greenies -
    Normal for the first games, it all makes much more sense.

  Zurgithian -
    Well I almost always go for meta, but I depends on the time you have to play
    or the number of friends you have to help play your race. Metas take time
    (you need macros as well, but I have done well spending hours podding before
    I discovered macros), to come in the top 5 of a big game you will need 1-2
    hours per update if you know how to use macros.

& 50

Subject: 50. What type of home planet should I choose?

  Feepness -
    A high resource, low fertility (desert or airless). You can always increase
    fertility later with resources.

  Lestat -
    Consider the sector compatibilities which are easiest for a given planet
    type (they're usually marked with a * by racegen). Planet types such as
    iceballs and airless are more difficult because they tend to be smaller and
    have less resources, making your race slower in getting underway. Note -
    choosing Earth (Class M) planets may seem tempting, and it's not a bad
    idea. However, in some universes, there are many Earth inhabiting
    players. This means there will be more competition against your race for
    these planets.

  Keskiolut -
    Pick a planet that is rather large (desert, forest) because you are not
    likely to get many planets in your first game...

  Neue Regel -
    Class M/Earth

  Garfel -
    1. Desert 2. Forest 3. Earth (you need too many sector preferences to use
    this planet effectively)

  Rob Nesius -
    This primarily depends on the sector compatibilities you choose. Jovian
    planets (gas giants) are very large, and have the ability to fuel up ships
    (so I hear). Half of the sector space in a galaxy is gas. Jovians are few
    and far between. Their resource content is not very rich, but
    passable. Whether or not Jovian races should be allowed to terraform sectors
    to gas is being debated. Class M's are primarily like Earth. Don't be
    fooled, they have LOTS of water...usually. If you have water as a compat,
    class M is not a bad choice. Waterballs are usually small but not too bad
    for resources. Iceballs are few and far between (I think) but also not too
    bad for resources.

  Thing -
    Picking planets is tough. I like to start on a Class M or desert since they
    are usually large. Large home worlds are good because they can be taxed, and
    a big planets has more res than a small one.

  Muu -
    I would go for the generic M-type planet. They aren't the most common, but
    they are really useful. As another option, you could go for a desert
    planet. These are GREAT for resources, but are generally very rare. Forest
    planets are also good, as they produce decent amounts of resources and your
    population will explode. As for other planets, such as asteroids, airballs,
    iceballs, and jovians, I would not advise choosing any of these as they all
    have problems associated with them, such as smallness, lack of resources,
    and rarity (for the jovians).

  Fnebish Legion -
    Choose either a Jovian, a desert planet, a Class M, or a forest planet. All
    the other types are too small to start with, and you'll find yourself having
    a hard time producing resources since production on a given planet goes as
    _the_power_ "number of sectors owned". Producing resources quickly on your
    home planet is crucial.

  Microbians -
    Personally, I like forest and desert planets. They have very good resource
    concentrations and despite much of the documentation, they are often quite
    large. To a certain extent, planet choice is moot because planetary size,
    and atmosphere have a much greater effect on the game than the planet
    type. Just make sure you are compatible with the vast majority of sectors
    that appear on your planet. (One reason I dislike class-Ms is because most
    races don't have enough sector preference diversity to colonize greater than
    90% of the sectors, and the uncolonized sectors stick out like a sore
    thumb).

  Tribbles -
    To start out with, use either forest or desert. High resource, and costs
    less in racegen; you can thus pick other sector pref's. I prefer a forest
    planet myself.

  NB -
    I tend toward Earthlike planets. Jovians are fun too if you don't mind being
    somewhat separated from the mainstream of the game.

  TheCulture -
    Again a matter of taste. I personally love desert worlds, since they have an
    extremely high resource content (i.e. you can build huge amounts of stuff on
    them). On the down side, desert worlds are low on fertility, so your
    population increase quite slowly. The "basic" home world is a "Type M"
    (Earth-type) planet, which is pretty even in all respects -- a pretty good
    choice for your first game. Other choices are the Water world (not that
    great), Iceball (avoid!), the Forest world (low resources, high fertility),
    and the Jovian. Jovians are unique in that they automatically make your race
    a gas-breather (which rules out any other sector preferences). This make for
    a division in the game between the Jovians and all the other races, as
    neither can use each other's worlds (although Jovians *can* terraform normal
    worlds into gas ones -- this could be considered a bug). You probably
    shouldn't choose Jovian for your first game, although if you're feeling
    brave go for it!

  Froos -
    Doesn't really matter too much. Just don't pick an iceball or asteroid since
    those usually are kind of small and puts a constraint on your earlier
    expansion. Don't choose forest worlds, either. There aren't too many of
    those.

  Griffons -
    It really depends on what you want out of your home planet. For cheap
    compatibilities, you should choose a forest. For high populations, forest or
    water then Earth. For resources, desert. The best way is to fiddle around
    with the enroll system until you have enough points to do what you want. You
    will find that the cost of compatibilities change as your home planets
    do. This cost has eliminated iceballs from being a viable starting planet.

  Pillarian -
    Most choose a class M (all sector types except gas) simply because it
    enables the player to parallel their race against the thinking of a modern
    day situation.

  Tao -
    Maybe Earth or forest (if this is asked). Both have fairly good fert and
    resources. Not desert, because fert is so low there.

  Empire -
    In earth-, forest- and jovian-type planet your population grows faster...In
    desert-type planet you have relatively greater resources...Of iceballs and
    airlesses I have no experiences...

  Link Baker -
    Earth type planets. Their size can support a decent population (Meso's need
    population for tech). They have pretty good resources.

  Greenies -
    Desert, or Earth. Both are fairly large planets, have plenty of resources,
    and can be found in just about every system.

  Zurgithian -
    Desert, Earth or Forest (Jovians are good too, but try the others first), as
    a meta you can have 1 guy live on any sector type so even if you are not an
    Earth type with incompatible sectors you can still mine resources there.

& 51

Subject: 51. How should I spend my remaining points?

  Feepness -
    Fiddle around, trying different things every game...that makes it fun.

  Lestat -
    Metabolism is important for producing resource at a reasonable rate,
    especially early on; many players recommend at least 0.95 or
    1.0. Adventurism encourages your people to spread out without your help. IQ
    is useful for developing tech. They're all useful, of course...which to
    emphasize the most is your personal preference. Just be sure, in your first
    few races at least, not to cripple any one stat too greatly, or you may
    regret it.

  Keskiolut -
    Metabolism is great, at least 1.0, and fight should never be below 3 or 4.

  Neue Regal -
    IQ will take most of them. Good IQ is about 150-170, 200 if you really want
    to spend the points.

  Garfel -
    Raise IQ to at least 180 and metabolism to 0.9. Drop adventurism to 0.05,
    birthrate to 0.6 (or maybe 0.5; it's not important to have it high), and get
    a little fertilize.

  Rob Nesius -
    Metamolism is a good place to put points. This represents how active your
    race is. A race with a low metab (0.8 is considered low) will build fuel,
    and resources (res) at a slower rate than a race with a 1.0 metab. You don't
    absolutely need a high metab. Lower metab is still playable, but it requires
    shrewder planning and foresight on the part of the player. Brithrate should
    be high. Adventurism need not be high. It represents the chances of members
    of your race deciding to expand the 'frontier'. For techies, IQ is usually a
    good one to boost up. Don't take more than 3-6 sexes required to reproduce.

  Thing -
    Always try ang get metab of 1.00 or great. I like to have 1 sex, since it
    makes colonizing easier. Concentrate on either a smart race or a good
    fighter type race.

  Muu -
    A high IQ is nice, as this allows your technology level to increase more
    quickly. Sector preferences are also really nice. For a normal race, the
    other stats aren't important, in my opinion. A low mass is useful, and
    sometimes you can save a lot of points by reducing adventurism to as low as
    possible. This has the effect of having to move all your population
    manually...They will not move on their own.

  Fnebish Legion -
    Get at least three sector preferences, but don't go for the "common"
    choices. It's best to find an unusual mix. You'll work much better with
    potential allies since you won't be wanting the same types of sectors. Also,
    make sure your metab is _at_least_ 1.0 unless you're a Jovian race (in which
    case 0.9 is a good minimum). If you're not going to spend the points on a
    high IQ, spend 'em on fight or metabolism. Don't try to max things out too
    much...at high levels of any attribute, then the cost rises much more
    quickly than the distinct edge, if possible.

  Microbians -
    It's up to you. Generally, it's not possible to take over the universe on
    your own, so you should make sure that you have something to offer potential
    allies. A perfectly well-rounded race, may not have much to contribute.

  Tribbles -
    For a first time player, try to only add sector prefs, go with the default
    setting for the most part. They're not great, but they're not bad either. I
    would try to have these sector pref's: Forest, Water, Desert, and land. Also
    drop your # of sexes to 1. It make metabolism a little cheaper.

  NB -
    Fight ability is good, but I tend to think reproduction (minimizing the
    number of sexes) is more important.

  TheCulture -
    Hmmm...depends heavily on the type of play you're going to foll. If you're a
    "tech" then you can downplay the "fight" and invest in IQ, and vice versa if
    you're going to go for the "Wood Clubs & Brute Strength"-department) I
    personally like investing a lot in IQ (tech).

  Froos -
    Make sure you have decent IQ (~150), reasonable birthrate (>0.6), good
    metabolism (1 or so), and try to be compatible with as many sectors as you
    can.

  Griffons -
    Well that really depends. To pull out the maximum res you need both a high
    pop and a high metab (res is required for the building of ships). Also Birth
    is good and so are compatibilities to sectors; likewise, someone with fight
    10 troops is really nasty to come across. The only way to really tell what
    you need is by your playing style. That only comes with experiences...Go for
    a basic race that populates well and has 180 tech...it is a good start for a
    beginner.

  Pillarian -
    Again it depends on what race you chose. If metamorph then fight would be
    useful followed by birth, then sectors (preferences). You may wish to
    sacrifice some of the IQ tech level for other things. If techie, then
    perhaps higher IQ. Fight is not highly required but a fight of one is a
    major loss. With such low fight most techies would be (initially) at the
    mercy of meso pods. Then you can choose between birth and metab.

  Tao -
    I usually drop my fight a little, buy metabolism and then just sort of
    spread the rest evenly (no use taking too much fertilizing or adventure
    though. If you won't be able to play in the start, then that advantage might
    help). Be unisex if you have the points.

  Empire -
    Take higher fight, metabolism and IQ...IMHO don't waste your points to get
    better fertilization; after the tech-level 5, the Space Plows will have the
    same effect...

  Link Baker -
    Metabolism is very important. After that a meso should go for
    fight. Birthrate is fine at 50-60%. Spend extra points on met and
    fight. Maybe sector compat. also, but it's expensive.

  Greenies -
    Desert, or Earth. Both are fairly large size planets, have plenty of
    resources, and can be found in just about every system.

  Zurgithian -
    Metas need a good fight and metabolism. In a blitz game you will need
    adventurism more than 0.25 (unless you have a population spread macro)
    otherwise have 0.1, a very high birth rate is needed to take planets quickly
    (metas like me are greedy, take all those sectors, ask Feep). If going for a
    low IQ meta then have some (0.25) fertility, pods and absorb are a must!!!
    If playing HAP go for metab of 1.8-2.0, in one game I had 6 planets after
    only 2 and a bit updates cos I got some res and fuel after the first update!
    You can afford to be pretty heavy as you will not be using techie ships for
    a while.

& 52

Subject: 52. What sector preferences should I choose?

  Feepness -
    Definitely water, desert, land and mountain. When playing a "Jovian" race,
    you really can't go wrong since there is a very high percentage of gas
    giants out there.

  Lestat -
    Always choose the ones which are best for your planet type; those are
    cheapest. I don't recommend buying more than one other sector compat, if
    even that, since the *number of compatibilities you have is a factor in
    point cost as well.

  Keskiolut -
    Main preference plus one or two another (take 100%, because they're cheap
    after the first 30% or so...). So, maybe a desert and forest. Or another
    good choice: desert, land and mountain.

  Neue Regel -
    For a Class M planet, take land, water, and ice. These are very common to
    other planets too. Forest can also be a good choice.

  Garfel -
    With desert: land/mountain; with forest: land/mountain/water; with Earth:
    land/water/mount (mount is not important but has higher resource content).

  Rob Nesius -
    Recommendations for these are plated, land, and water. You should have
    compatibility with these three sectors before you choose others. You don't
    need 90-100% on every sector type you do choose. You can select 50% or lower
    so you can make use of the few odd sectors, or asteroids, forest planets,
    etc... Ice is a good one, since it shows up on iceballs and most class M
    planets on the poles.

  Thing -
    Pick as many sector prefs as you can; get them to at least 25%. The best
    ones in my opinion are home planet sector, desert, mountain, land, forest,
    water than ice.

  Muu -
    If you don't have a sector preference in a certain sector type, you
    effectively can't live on those sector types. So, if you can afford it, but
    some compatibility in all, or most of the sectors. They don't have to be
    bought at 100%. 10-20% should do for most of them. Be sure to get one or two
    sector-types at a high compatibility, such as 90-100%. If you live on a
    Class M, I would suggest land, water, forest, and a little desert. Again, if
    you can get at least a little in all the sector types.

  Fnebish Legion -
    I mentioned this a little bit before. Land and forest have the highest
    fertility (I'm not mentioning gas since, if you take a Jovian race, gas is
    your only viable option), hence can support more population. This is good
    for races with collective IQ. Mountain and desert have high resource content
    but low fertility, so they're goof for races with high metab. Ice is useful
    since it is found on almost all the planets in at least some small amounts,
    and water is a good choice for a race starting on a class M, though it is
    generally poor in resource content. Select an unusual mix and you'll find
    working with allies much easier.

  Microbians -
    Similarly it's not a good idea to be compatible with every kind of
    sector. MANY alliances are based on sector incompatibilities.

  Tribbles -
    See comment to question 3.

  NB -
    Land, forest, and water are my favorites.

  TheCulture -
    100% for your "home" sector type (i.e. water for water words etc.), and at
    least 50% on a couple of others. "Land" and "Mountain" are pretty good
    choices, since they are quite common. Again, this depends on your play
    style. You can invest a lot in sec. preferences and be able to utilize
    pretty much anything right at once, or you can invest in tech and build
    Terraformers as soon as possible (with Terraformers you can change sector
    types into your own preferred sector type).

  Froos -
    Try to include either land or mountain because many of the asteroid/iceball
    type planetary bodies will have one of these two sectors on them.

  Griffons -
    Totally dependent on your home planet. The more the better but you will find
    that some sector preferences cost too much due to you being on a planet that
    does not have the sector much. You will get the idea if you try having a
    desert home and water compatibility. Water tends to be one of the most
    common (generally supports high pop but low res production). Forest is the
    same as water but supports a higher pop and is very rare (throughout the
    universe, that is). Land, is incredibly common with average pop and res
    production. Ice is common, supports little population but high than average
    res. Gas is only good if you are a Jovian race: low pop/sector and low
    res. Mountain is high res and low pop. Desert same as mountain but generally
    more res.

  Pillarian -
    Depending on what racegen is being employed will depend on your avenues of
    decision. These mainly being what you will require 100% of the main
    sector(s) of what ever planet type you have chosen. i.e. class M land (*) or
    mountain (^) on the GB enroll system. Variances have and will occur in the 2
    main race gens available...(GB's { code, and Clay's port driven system).

  Tao -
    I've had quite a good start with starting on Earth and being able to use
    water, desert and land. Deserts could be changed to mount, maybe. That way
    you can land on most planets, get resourceful sectors (desert) and still
    spread well on your home planet (water).

  Empire -
    As many as possible so you have wider basement when you start to colonize
    other planets...Mountain is resource-rich and quite a non-rare sector type,
    but it costs points. If you take gas, you don't need to take any other
    sector types...

  Link Baker -
    Water is pretty abundant in the universe. Forest is rare. Choose water, and
    then land or mountains. Stay away from rare sector types.

  Greenies -
    Besides your planet type sector, definitely choose mountain. There are
    mountains on every planet, and asteroid.

  Zurgithian -
    The primary sector type must be 100% i.e. on Water planets have water 100%,
    forest 100% on Forest planets etc. On Desert planets you can usually have
    desert, mountain or ice as 100%. For metas it is good to have some compat
    with forest as your population grows fast because of the high
    fertility. Always go for some land! If playing HAP have some mountains as
    there is lots around.

& 53

Subject: 53. What should I do before the first update?

  Feepness -
    Beg for an update. It doesn't make much of a difference to unload people
    from the government center.

  Lestat -
    Unload a few people from your government center to join in the first
    reproductive pass. Be sure to leave at least on in so you'll get APs! Spend
    the APs you have moving a few people around diagonally from your starting
    sector, to encourage widespread colonization. Decide if you want a tax rate
    (lowers efficiency I believe) or mobilization (eventually produces
    destructive capacity at the expense of resource). Chat some with other
    players.

  Keskiolut -
    Unload @, spread ppl to next-to-@-sectors. Because you NEED as much ppl as
    possible and they do _not_ reproduce without you spreading them. Even if you
    have adventurism this is recommended.

  Neue Regel -
    Get your MIN-SEXES to as many sectors as you can. You will be limited by
    both APs and total population. I tend to unload 4-6 people from my @ before
    the 1st update. Load them back in after the update though.

  Garfel -
    Unload your @ (load #number c -10). Depending on your number of sexes, that
    number of people to the highest fertility sectors so you have a lot of
    people after the 1st update.

  Rob Nesius -
    Move your people around. It's important to get your planet covered as much
    as possible. Move them around in small groups so you use fewer action
    points. Soon, your people will start making resources and fuel. HINT: Use
    the 'analysis' command to determine which sectors are your most resource
    rich. It's probably not a good idea to unload people from the government
    center. You need people there to maintain efficiency, which is a very
    important aspect of sector stats. The more efficient you are, the faster you
    pump out res. And the more efficient your government, well...think about it.

  Thing -
    On the first update, take enough people out of your @ and move them 1 space
    away from your @. This will help you spread out faster, but you will not get
    as many APs as fast, After the first update, load the @ to full again.

  Muu -
    The most enjoyable thing to do, and sometimes really useful, is to meet all
    the people. Potential allies and enemies always pop up. You should also look
    at your position and determine possible routes to nearby stars. That's about
    all I usually do before the update, except for unloading the @. On the very
    first update, I usually unload five (5) crew from the government center. I
    then spread them around to five nearby sectors. After the first update, one
    should always reload the center with crew, as an insufficiently manned
    center does not produce Action Points (APs), which, as you will find out,
    limits the number of actions you can do. APs are vital in the beginning of
    the game.

  Fnebish Legion -
    Nothing, unless you want to try unloading your government center Raising tax
    rates and mobilizing should come after the 6th or 7th updates, IMHO. If you
    will be on at the update so that you can reload your center after the first
    update, go ahead and do it. Unloading your center at the beginning, taking 4
    crew out, is nice because it gives you a head start on your expansion at the
    cost of only a couple of APs (this is not entirely clear to me due to
    conflicting information, but I'm told that the centers probably _don't_
    produce fewer APs with less crew inside...still, you might as well keep it
    fully loaded after the first update).

  Microbians -
    If you are playing in a game where you start out with 1200 people, you
    probably want to colonize the four sectors on a diagonal from your start
    sector. (I assume here that all races have six sexes or less) If your race
    has on sex move one person into each sector, otherwise move six. this will
    use your APs most efficiently. If you are playing in a game where you start
    with one person, you might want to unload the government center, but never
    unload more than 5 and reload it immediately after the first turn.

  Tribbles -
    Drop the # of civ's in capitol by half. Use extra population on the
    planet. Remember to load up the cap again later. Also, spread people over
    sectors, just put your # of sexes in each sector that you have AP for
    example I have 1 sex, thus I move 1 pop into all but one surrounding
    sectors, I then move all but one in orig sector into the one empty sector,
    then I repeat the process gain until planet is covered. If you have over 40
    pop in a sector though, move only half. It costs too much AP to move more
    than 20 pop.

  NB -
    Not much! Try out commands, read the help extensively, and try to
    communicate via broadcasting with other players. I've never tired to unload
    my @! Hey, maybe I'm not all that far from a newbie myself.

  TheCulture -
    Unload the crew of the government center (@), and move people to nearby
    sectors that look promising (high resources and compatible sector
    type). Chat with the other players. Try not to think of the million other
    things you should be doing instead of playing this (altogether too
    addictive) game...

  Froos -
    Spread your people out. I usually unload my @. For a morph, dump off about 3
    or 4. You only have 5 APs to start out with, and it costs one to move one
    guy, so dropping off more really doesn't help.

  Griffons -
    Unload your @ and spread the pop out, but don't forget to load the @ back up
    after the update.

  Pillarian -
    first unload 5 crew from your capitol (ship number of you capitol will be
    equal to your race number)...eg. "load @ c -5" or "load #shipnum c -5". Once
    you have done this, you spread out the 5 pop (one at a time as you have only
    5 APs before the first update. Make sure you don't move the pop onto
    incompatible sectors. This is, of course only if you are a one sex race; you
    would have to modify the numbers for how many sexes you have. As long as you
    move a whole "breeding group" you are okay. The good point of this: It helps
    get your pop increasing faster; fert and eff on those sectors will already
    start to increase. Bad: You will get half the APs that update, so I suggest
    after the first update you load your gov center back up. Remember that a
    capitol or gov center will only produce AP in relation to its current level
    of crew (i.e. 100% crew gives you 100% AP, etc.). The next thing you should
    do is have a look at the number and distribution of the planets in your home
    system. Next, go to the global scope and have a look at where you are in the
    universe (this is important as your position will determine as a whole your
    further strategy). Other things you may consider doing: naming your
    governor, perhaps changing your password, appointing a second governor (more
    for your convenience than anything). I would also (if you are will to, that
    is) place your email address in your "personal" this helps when you "run"
    into other races. It makes the politics much simpler. However in a HAP game
    this is regarded as a BIG nono. Next, I would think about the possible
    access to a postscript printer. If you have access to one, then I strongly
    suggest that you pipe a copy of the stars list to a log file, then generate
    a stars map (the program to do this is available all over the place). Then I
    would just wait.

  Tao -
    Not much that you need to do. Talk to others and ask stupid
    questions...They'll help you. I usually unload people from my government
    center and spread them out.

  Empire -
    Use command: help and if there's still something unclear use broadcast and
    ask it from other players, there's always experienced players around. Unload
    people from you @ so you can start populate more quickly.

  Link Baker -
    view the maps of your home planet, system, and your location in the
    universe. Unload @ and spread the people around. Find out how close
    neighboring systems are, which ones you want to explore 1st. Unload all but
    one crew from your @ so you still get some APs. Spread 'em around. Load it
    back up after the 1st update. You should have plenty of pop unless you have
    a really shitty birthrate. Get that planet covered ASAP.

  Greenies -
    Get all but one of your people out of the Gov Center, and do spread them
    around it. Look to see where in the universe you are, just for curiosity.

  Zurgithian -
    As a meta with 1 sex you can take 6 sectors on the first move, unload 8 crew
    from the @ and move 5 pop 1 sector in different direction. Load up the @
    again after the first update. No tax yet, but have mobility at 25 or so
    after the first update.

& 54

Subject: 54. What is the first ship I should build? The second?

  Feepness -
    If you are impatient and have lots of r, you can build a ground telescope
    and survey your system, otherwise wait and build a factory for shuttles.

  Lestat -
    If you are a meso, the first and second ship you should build is a pod. If
    you are a normal race, build a factor (F) as soon as you can afford it, and
    teach it to build shuttles (cs #factnum; make s). If your res production is
    going to outstrip your tech, use "modify" to make the shuttle lower
    tech. Put people in the factory, turn it on, wait for it to repair. Use the
    "fact" command (if present on the server) to keep an eye on the factories
    over the segs and updates. When it's finished, use "build #" to build # of
    ships while in that factory.

  Keskiolut -
    First to build is F. Modify it to make s's, as cheap and FAST as possible,
    maybe carrying nothing but 1 cargo (for upgrading later) and SEX-number of
    people plus as much fuel as possible.

  Neue Regel -
    Make a factory as soon as you can. Have it produce stripped down shuttles so
    you can get to as many planets as possible.

  Garfel -
    One ground telescope as soon as you get tech 5 and 2 res then aim at the
    nearest planets, then a Factory to build shuttles with a modified speed of
    at least 6.

  Rob Nesius -
    A good choice for a first ship for a techie is a Factory. Use the factory to
    build a shuttle to send out to the other planets in the solar system. Also,
    while your factory is fixing itself, (it starts with 75% damage and needs
    time to repair). Build a ground telescope so that you can see what the
    planets in your system are like, and don't send your first shuttle to an
    incompatible planet.

  Thing -
    The first ship you should build is a factory; do not build it, though until
    you have enough res to turn it on. Wait until you have at least 33 res
    before building it. You want the shuttle to hold only the minimum number of
    crew, no guns, no destruct, and no resources. This will let you pay less per
    shuttle and spend more on speed. If you are a meta, just start building and
    launching pods as soon as you get the res and fuel to do it.

  Muu -
    The very first ship I would build is a telescope. That way, you can examine
    the other planets in your solar system and see which ones you should target
    for colonization first. The second should probably be a Factory to build
    colonization shuttles. These should have 5-10 crew and 10 crew if
    possible. Remember, when you construct a ship design on a Factory, you don't
    have to be at the given tech of the ship until you want to build them, which
    is as soon as the Factory comes online (about 3-4 updates after activation).

  Fnebish Legion -
    If you're a metamorph, build pods like crazy until you have the tech
    capability to build shuttles with speed 4 or so (you can experiment with a
    factory to find out what tech you need). Otherwise, build _nothing_ until
    you've built your factory and turned it on. Don't even build a little
    telescope. You want that factory turned on ASAP, even if you have to set it
    to building really crappy and cheap shuttles. Once you have something built,
    you can always modify it later (when you can afford it)...the important
    thing is getting that F turned on. Once you've spent your res doing this (it
    costs 23 plus twice the cost of the ship design to build and then turn on
    the factory), you can build a telescope to survey surrounding planets in
    your system.

  Microbians -
    Pods for a Meso, shuttles for a normal. A lot depends on your strategy, your
    race, your start planet, and (especially with Ts) the rules of the game.

  Tribbles -
    Hmmm...This is questionable. It really depends on the race. For the normal
    players I would say shuttles and then explorers. Though I've designed races
    to ship shuttle production before. Remember shuttles are for in system
    exploration mostly while explorers are for other systems.

  NB -
    The first ship is almost invariable a shuttle from which the weapons systems
    and so on have been stripped that can carry your minimum number of sexes to
    another planet in your system for colonization. The second? Another one!
    Later you should build some shuttles with a bit of destruct on board, to
    give you a chance of snuffing out unwanted alien colonies at the beginning
    of their existence. Of course, if you're a morph, you'll build pods first.

  TheCulture -
    In GB a "ship" is anything that you build, so in GB terms the first ship you
    should build is (a) a pod, if you're a morph; (b) a ground telescope if
    you're a normal race. With this gadget you can view your solar system and
    get some picture of your position so you can send your shuttles to the right
    places. The second ship type you should build is a factory (F). When you
    have enough tech and res, you can order it to produce shuttles (for
    instance) and in a couple of updates, you can start spreading out.

  Froos -
    If you're a morph, pods. If normal, shuttle, then maybe explorer.

  Griffons -
    Depends on what you can build pods are good for a meso. A shuttle factory
    for all those who do not have pods.

  Pillarian -
    Again it depends on what race you are...Meso...You pod like crazy...if you
    are a techy then I suggest that you build a telescope (gives you something
    to do more than anything) then save up for a factory...the second for a
    meso...(second type not the second ship) would be K's (Space Plows...) at
    tech 5...

  Tao -
    First ground telescope to see what planets there are in your system. Then
    shuttles...

  Empire -
    Perhaps the Ground Telescope would be best as a first ship...With it you can
    survey other planets in your star system...Second would be a factory to
    produce shuttles to get colonization to start...Don't forget to set your tax
    to about 5 percent, 'cause maintaining of the ships takes money and if you
    don't have money your morale drops...

  Link Baker -
    1st) For a meso, a pod. For a techie, a factory (to build shuttles) 2nd)
    Meso - pod. Techie - whatever you have the tech for while you are waiting on
    the shuttles. Domes help the planet and you.

  Greenies -
    A factory, for shuttles. Then a ground telescope, to check out your system.

  Zurgithian -
    find out how many planets there are in your system using the explore
    commands and build a pod for each one (only need 1 fuel) when you have the
    res. Send the pod to a planet, land it on a good sector (use analysis to
    find one and scrap the pod, hey presto another colony). As soon as you have
    the res and fuel send 5-10 pods to your 10 nearest starts (send them in
    waves, 1 update apart) you will need 1 fuel per ~8000 distance depending on
    your race's weight.

& 55

Subject: 55. What can I do to increase my resource production on any given
             planet?

  Feepness -
    Cover every sector.

  Lestat -
    Get a higher metabolism, get more population.

  Keskiolut -
    Build Y's. Nothing much else.

  Neue Regel -
    Build Y's or q's. Y's have an added effect of producing plated sectors which
    make it harder for any ships landed on that sector to be hit. q's produce
    extra toxicity but give more resources in the beginning. As your sector
    efficiency goes up, q's become less useful.

  Garfel -
    You could use quarries, but I don't recommend it. They cost res to build and
    make the planet more toxic.

  Rob Nesius -
    You can increase resource production with 'quarries'. Beware, you can
    generate 'toxicity' with quarries, but they will probably help you out very
    much. Also, I believe Domes can be helpful.

  Thing -
    To increase res production, use domes (Y), and start out with a good
    metabolism. Make the domes on sectors that have the most res in them; use
    the analysis command to find out which sector has the most res. Also make
    sure you can live on that type sector.

  Muu -
    Generally, get as much population as possible. Cover your homeworld as soon
    as possible. And build Domes (Y's) on a few sectors to get their efficiency
    up (which affects resource production).

  Fnebish Legion -
    First, cover every single sector you are compatible with. Next, if you have
    spare resources, you can build domes to increase the efficiency of some
    sectors, which will increase your overall average efficiency, which will, in
    turn, increase production without hurting your planet. I've found that
    quarries are a real waste of time and resources.

  Microbians -
    Well, you are going to have to wait a while before you get any significant
    production. If you are a non-Jovian and you have the tech and resources to
    spare, you might want to consider domes. Either way, KEEP THE TAXES LOW.

  Tribbles -
    You can build quarries, though I never do. You can also increase your
    population using K's and build Y's (domes) to increase it's efficiency. If
    you're real brave you can design your race to have a real high metab, like
    1.5. Thus, you'd never have to worry about resources.

  NB -
    Spread your population thoroughly (make sure you[re compatible with the
    sectors you put people on however), and build domes when you have the
    available time and resource; domes increase efficiency greatly.

  TheCulture -
    Move people to the sectors with the highest resource contents, build domes
    (Y) on the best sectors, and possibly build a space plow (K) to increase
    sector fertility so that more people appear there. If the planet has the
    wrong type of atmosphere or temperature you can use atmosphere processors,
    space mirrors, dust canisters and greenhouse gas to good effect.

  Froos -
    You could build quarries, or try to put your guys on high res sectors.

  Griffons -
    Increase the average efficiency (through doming) or increase the pop through
    space plows etc.

  Pillarian -
    Well the best way to increase r production is to increase your
    efficiency. You can do this by doming sectors...believe me it is worth
    putting r into domes!!!

  Tao -
    Build domes, quarries, terraformers, space plows...

  Empire -
    You can build Domes after tech-level 5, they increase your sector efficiency
    on which depends your resource-production...

  Link Baker -
    Get that entire planet covered! After that you'll have to increase the
    efficiencies of the sectors with domes. Other than that there's not much
    else you can do. That's why it's important to have metabolism.

  Greenies -
    Wait. Quarries are overrated.

  Zurgithian -
    Cover the whole planet, even sectors you don't like, build domes on these
    sectors as soon as possible so that you can plate them. I don't use
    quarries; they're nasty.

& 56

Subject: 56. Should I colonize planets in my own system first, or should I focus
             on arriving in other systems before opponents can?

  Feepness -
    Concentrate on other systems, except hith the high fertility planets in your
    system at the same time. An enemy could breed on a class M ten times faster
    than on an iceball.

  Lestat -
    Yes.

  Keskiolut -
    Because you are a beginner, take your own system first.

  Neue Regel -
    Depends on how close the neighboring systems are. I try to go for the
    neighboring systems first and get a shuttle to my own planets after I have
    sent 2 or 3 s's to the other systems. If system are very close (<10K) it
    would probably be better to get those first shuttles to your own
    planets. Don't forget to build a telescope and check out your own
    planets. this can save you a lot of time by not having to go to every
    planet.

  Garfel -
    Both if possible. colonize only the best planets of your own system, like
    those over 40% compatibility and go fast to the nearest systems!

  Rob Nesius -
    try to colonize your own system first, and establish a good population base
    and fleet. Throughout the beginning, you may talk confidentially to other
    players, or publicly to everyone. If you can get a crypt set up with another
    player, feel free to ask questions. Also, God is an experience player who
    can give advice, but don't run to him before trying to figure it out on your
    own. Otherwise he'd be swamped. It's good to establish friendly relations
    with other players, and even better ones with races who are in a position to
    mess with you. Try to get on people's good side. Even if you are going to
    backstab them.

  Thing -
    Do both. Use one ship to colonize the planets in your star. Use a telescope
    to save time by aiming it at the planets and seeing if you can live on
    them. Use your remaining ships to colonize the nearest stars to you.

  Fnebish Legion -
    Use a telescope to check out the planets in your system if you have the tech
    to do it. Colonize those you are compatible with, but always send your first
    dozen or so chips out of system so they can get a head start on the race
    with the other players to arrive at and colonize unpopulated systems. If
    waiting to colonize your planets allows some other race to sneak in, odds
    are it will be quite easy for you to kick that player out since you will
    have the resources nearby to build the necessary ships to do it. This is a
    last resort of course, since you should always ally with your neighbors if
    at all possible.

  Microbians -
    Contrary to most of the advice I've been given, I usually colonize my home
    system first. It costs less in time, and after you colonize your home, you
    can use the same ships to arrive at other systems.

  Tribbles -
    BOTH! You start off colonizing your planet until you get enough tech to
    build speed 6-7 shuttles. then use upgrade (cs into ship scope have
    resources on ship and use "upg speed 7"). When you can do this then send
    some shuttles to other systems. When you can build explorers, do so and send
    them to other systems. An awesome race would have the ability to skip
    shuttles, go to explorers and thus explore out space the same time as it
    colonizes its home planets, but it's risky even for experienced players.

  NB -
    colonize your own system quickly! Arriving in other systems early is find if
    you can build some speed 9 shuttles to zip to the nearest starts, but
    hyperdrive will arrive before your slower shuttles reach places much further
    than a star or two away. If you're a 'morph, of course, you should be firing
    off pods from the very first updates!

  TheCulture -
    I'd say focus on the other systems. The primitive ship types (pod, shuttle)
    move slowly, so you have to be fast if you want to make it to the best spots
    before anyone else does. You'll always have time later to focus on your own
    system.

  Froos -
    Do you own first. easier and faster and it'll give you additional supplies
    to conquer other systems with.

  Griffons -
    The latter, the more territory that you can gain early the more you will not
    have to fight over later.

  Pillarian -
    Again everything is relative...But my answer would be YES! You should
    colonize your system first. You must at least devote your first inter-scope
    ship to the task...then work out from there...if you have close
    neighbors...and they get to you first...and you haven't colonized your
    system, you could be inviting disaster.

  Tao -
    I'd say it depends on what kinds of planets you've got. If you have great
    planets in your own system (the telescope!), send the first ones
    there. Otherwise sort of divide your forces...

  Empire -
    IMHO, colonize your planets first before somebody else do it...

  Link Baker -
    Everybody should have their own strategy regarding this.

  Greenies -
    Usually the competition for other system doesn't happen for a
    while. Definitely go for your own system first.

  Zurgithian -
    Both at the same time, pods are cheap in res so if you have a high
    metabolism you can send out lots and lots. After the first 10-20 updates you
    should have podded all the systems within 100000 dist of you, if you have
    the time!

& 57

Subject: 57. What should I do when I see another ship other than my own?

  Feepness -
    Talk first...don't give away too much. If it's named something nice like
    "Friendly" then you can assume it's going to be OK. Also, if it is a size 1
    shuttle you don't have much to worry about in any case, but a size 6 d, you
    should definitely make friends if you aren't going to be able to destroy it
    immediately. Put yourself in the other person's place (he is just trying to
    colonize and will be pretty pissed if you blow away his ship for no reason
    other than he exists). Also keep in mind that this person is probably very
    near you as well. A close-in fight like that can be disastrous in a game.

  Lestat -
    find out who owns it, try to communicate with that player if you wish. If
    you're aggressive or foolish, attack it. If it's a colonizing pod, blow it
    away. This is all more a matter of personal style than learning the rules.

  Keskiolut -
    Talk, negotiate. Do not shoot first, you'll be losing most probably.

  Neue Regel -
    Don't try and destroy them right off. That person could be your best ally
    later on. If you see another ship early in the game, it means that someone
    else is close by. If you start into a war right away, you will have a really
    hard time building up at all. The other players who are not fighting right
    away have more time to expand to other systems.

  Garfel -
    Try to negotiate armistice if he is in a high place in power list, or if you
    have good allies near than splat that bastard.

  Rob Nesius -
    When this first happened to me, I panicked somewhat. After I calmed myself
    down and thought it out, I realized that the ships were not a major threat,
    and that they couldn't know I was here, so it's not a personal attack on me
    the player. Open up a dialogue. If there is a planet you can't use but they
    can, let them in exchange for permission to colonize in their own
    system. YOU CAN'T WIN GALACTIC BLOODSHED ON YOUR OWN. FIND OUT ABOUT
    'ALLIANCES' AND BLOCKS. THESE ARE WHAT CAN BE DECIDING FACTORS IN WINNING
    THE GAME.

  Thing -
    If you see another ship that is not yours, send a telegram to the ship's
    owner. If he is hostile, capture it. If it is in your home system, capture
    it no matter what.

  Muu -
    That really depends on you. If you want war, then by all means, do what you
    will. However, it can be REALLY profitable to team up with a Meta, if you
    are a norm. They generally produce more rapidly, and make great troops. Be
    careful, though, they are not as easy to suppress as some might lead you to
    believe. thinking of him as "my Meta" might just get you into a nasty little
    fight. Again, its really up to you and the situation.

  Fnebish Legion -
    Try to find out what player number owns it by using "tact". If it is your
    own pod and you see the other ship on the map, tact won't work, but there is
    a trick for seeing who owns other ships which appear on your map but are too
    far away for a tactical command to work on them: Use the "highlight" command
    to run through the list of players, generating a new map for each new
    highlighted player. As soon as the other ship lights up, you'll be able to
    see who owns it. It's best to talk to that person since he's probably a
    neighbor. If you want peace, don't start making demands or claims of "I was
    here first". that gets you nowhere. Of course, as a general rule, I only let
    the _most_ trusted allies colonize my home systems. Players should
    understand that being allowed to place a colony in another's home system is
    probably a pretty big act of trust. A lot of full-scale and crippling wars
    have been fought simply because one player refused to leave another's home
    system. Deal with this as you see fit.

  Microbians -
    Diplomacy. Declare neutrality if you have the APs and start talking to the
    owner. Look for an alliance and try to ascertain the enemy's experience. Oh,
    and one other thin. I've done EXTREMELY well in my first two games and the
    secret to my success has been (with the exception of the deity of course)
    NEVER EVER, UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES, LET ON THAT YOU ARE A NEWBIE!!!

  Tribbles -
    Talk first, shoot later. Besides, the first ship you see will most likely be
    in a place where you can't do much any way. Allies can be more powerful than
    enemies. *grin* Think about it.

  NB -
    If it's in your own system, or just one adjacent to it, don't shoot right
    away (unless it's a missile - ALWAYS shoot missiles, and be sure to give
    their owners a heard time about it in the future!). Try to communicate with
    the owner. If you're seeing them relatively early in the game, then they're
    probably a neighbor, and you need to negotiate with neighbors to avoid
    counterproductive wars. You may have a planet useless to you that would be
    useful to them - and vice versa. When pods burst in your system, talk to the
    owners *quick*. If they don't respond, snuff out the one-man invasion that
    results on whichever planet it showed up, and do it quickly, because 'morphs
    reproduce like, well, 'morphs. Bunnies can't hold a candle.

  TheCulture -
    If it's a pod might be a good idea to shoot it down (at least if its in your
    home system), otherwise talking is a *very* good idea. Making too many
    enemies too fast in the game can lead to your home planet being turned into
    a nuclear test site.

  Froos -
    This really depends on the individual context. Try to talk to the owner,
    perhaps.

  Griffons -
    Close to find out who owns it and then try to parley with them. Successful
    parleying can allow you toe have a good relationship or give you time so
    that you can backstab later.

  Pillarian -
    Find out who it belongs to (i.e. tact)! Then the best idea is to talk to the
    owner (i.e. email to him) or send him a telegram, etc., then decide between
    you two what you are going to do. The progress from there...However you have
    to remember that generating a fair trust level in this game is
    difficult...if you mess up explain the mess up...else you could invite war
    at the drop of a hat...this could be good...but then again

  Tao -
    Send him a message and say Hi!

  Empire -
    Try always negotiate first, you need allies to be good in this game...and
    GOOD LUCK!...we may meet sometime...

  Link Baker -
    Do a 'tactical' on it to see what it is, who owns it, etc...If it's an enemy
    and you have an armed ship around, blast it (fire command). If you are close
    enough board the ship and capture it (assault command). Any alien ship in
    your system is a threat. You might want to telegram the person and find out
    what his intentions are before taking action. A pod is trouble; it means a
    meso is looking to colonize.

  Greenies -
    Send a message offering them one of the planets you don't use, or tell them
    that you live there already.

  Zurgithian -
    As a meta there is not much you can do, arm up some military on each planet
    so that they can not kick you off (high fight is important). I usually go
    the diplomatic route send them some telegrams, you will nee a techie ally
    and they will probably want a meta friend as well. Always check the tactical
    report in your home star!
