& tour

{{SUBJECT}}
  tour -- Newbie tour

{{DESCRIPTION}}
  This is a tour for new GB players...short introductions of the most important
commands. This tour is not perfect nor complete, but it tries to give some help
for new players who are confused with tons of help files. Do not try to play
only with this tour...this shows only the basic use of some commands. Read the
other help files too.

  Keep your eyes open in the game and ask from more experienced players. Pretty
soon you will find your own way to play.

__First Commands, Communication__ (help tour communication)
__Then We Inhabit Our Planet__    (help tour planet)
__How About Other Players?__      (help tour players)
__We Will Build Our First Ships__ (help tour building)
__Time To Fight__                 (help tour combat)
__Money, Money__                  (help tour money)
__Important Ships__               (help tour ships)

& communication

__{{First Commands, Communication}}__

  First commands youw will need are communication commands __broadcast__,
__send__, __read__

  When you want to say or ask something type
    {{broadcast (message)}}

and all players currently logged on can 'hear' you. In this example your
racename is Aliens and your playername is Rookie. Example: (note short form
of commands broadcast)
    {{bro How can I examine my planet?}}

  And everyon receives a message:
    {{Aliens "Rookie" How can I examine my planet?}}

  When question includes secrets you may use send command. Example: (you
ask your friend, player 5, Predator)
    {{send 5 How many resources do you have?}}

  Later when Predator answers your receive message
    {{'Predator 5,0 has sent you a dispatch'}}

  You can read it simply by typing
    {{read d}}

  You might get answer like this:
    Predator "Leader" I have 10 resos. How about you?

  Note, every time you send a dispatch you also give a little bit of information
of your race to the player you send the telegram. So in early stage of game use
broadcast always when it is possible.

  Second step communication commands are...__page__, __think__, __announce__,
__post__

& planet

__{{Then We Inhabit Our Planet}}__

  First step inhabiting commands are __map__, __move__, __allocate__,
__survey__, __analysis__

  OK, you have a planet. What kind of planet do you have? Take a look by
typing:
    {{map}}

  Your map might look something like this:
     {{'Secundus'}}
       {{00000}}
       {{01234}}

    {{00 *###^ 00}}
    {{01 ^#@#^ 01}}
    {{02 ###^^ 02}}

       {{00000}}
       {{01234}}

  That @ sector is inhabited by you. Of course you want to inhabit all
compatible sectors to you (hopefully you are compatible with all sectors in
your planet), so you need to move your population around. You can move your
population by typing:
    {{move (sector) (compass direction) (number of population)}}

  Example: (you want to move two people north from sector 2,1)
    {{move 2,1 8 2}}

  Compass direction are same if you have in keyboard numberpad. 1 is south-west,
2 is south, 3 is south-east and so on. Moving people costs __actionpoints__. The
more you move the more it costs. But in the start you do not have better use for
your ap:s so SPEND THEM ALL until whole planet is covered. Use also all global
ap:s. You can transfer global ap:s with allocate command.
    {{allocate (number)}}

  Example: (if you try to transfer too much, game will tell you the maximum
possible amount)
    {{allocate 15}}

  Now you can spend those 15 global ap:s in your homeplanet. Those 15 ap:s are
no more global...they are your homesystem's ap:s now. The number of people you
want to move is usually the number of your race's sexes. So in the next update
they will multiple and you will get more people to move. But do you have enough
people in the sector from which you want to move some population? You can check
the sector by typing:
    {{survey (sector)}}

  Example: (let us test your first sector 2,1)
    {{surv 2,1}}

  It might tell you this
    {{x,y cond/type  owner race eff mob frt res mil popn ^popn xtals}}
    {{2,1   #   #        0    0   7   4  37 183   0   12    22}}

  popn means number of population in the surveyed sector. In this case 12.
Analysis is a good command when you want to know the best sectors in the planet.
Type simply:
    {{analysis}}

  Important note! You WANT to have population in BOTH your command center, @,
and in the sector in which your command sector resides WHEN the first update
happens. Your first sector will produce a lot of new residents to your planet
and command center will generate ap's to move those newborn civilians.

  Second step inhabiting commands are __colonies__, __production__

& players

__{{How About Other Players?}}__

  Information available in game __name__, __victory__, __profile__,
__personal__,__power__

  You need a name...quess what command can help you? Yes...'name'. You can name
your 'playername' or re-name your race.
    {{name governor (name)}}
    {{name race (name)}}

  Example:
    {{name governor Rookie}}
    {{name race Martians}}

  How is the game going? Who is in the lead? Command 'victory' tells you current
rankings. But...victory list is generated by very complicate calculations and
some races might get loads of cheap victorypoints. In the early stage of game
victory gives you nothing more than just list of players. Somewhere after update
20 you can pay more attention to the rankings in the victory list. To see that
list simply type:
    {{victory}}

  Now you know the names of other players...what else do you know about them?
Type:
    {{profile (race number)}}

for more information. The more you know about the race the more the profile
tells you. In the beginning you do not know anything except one personal line
that players may add into their profile. You can write personal line into your
race's profile by typing:
    {{personal (personal message)}}

  Personal message is usually some kind of motto or email address or anything
you like. Back to the profile...Information about your race is transferred to
another race when you do something with them. Sending a telegram gives 2%,
ground combat and assault etc. gives more, and so on. It is usually wise to stay
as unknown as you can until you know whether the other race is a friend or an
enemy.

  More important than a victory list is a power list. It tells more detailed
information about another race's strength. How much power tells depend again of
how much you know about another races. If you do not yet know 100% server
approximates the rest, so the more you know the more valid is the information.
Syntax is simple:
    {{power}}

  In some spot it becomes important to make visible alliances and begin wars.

  The following comands are needed then. __relation__, __declare__

& building

__{{Soon We Will Build Our First Ships}}__

  Important commands in ship building are __build__, __make__, __modify__

  Q: Now I have 50 resources. What shall I do?
  A: Build ships.
    {{build (ship) (sector)}}

  Ship is the ship-type you want. Usually the first one is a factory. Sector
is the sector onto which you want that ship. Example:
    {{build F 2,1}}

  Now you have a factory...congratulations. OK...lets say you factory's number
is #357. What is this factory good for? Nothing yet, but let us make it useful.
First change scope inside your factory. Because your factory's number is #357,
say:
    {{cs #357}}

  Now you have to choose the ship-type you want your factory to make. The best
choice for the first ship is a shuttle. Say:
    {{make s}}

(s indicates shuttles). The default mode shuttle is not necessarily the best
possible model. You can change blueprints of the shuttle with modify command.
But before we do that let use take a look at current blueprints. Say:
    {{factory}}

and you see lines like these:
{{#    Cost Tech Mass Sz A Crw Ful Crg Hng Dst Sp Weapons Lsr CEWs Range Dmg}}
{{357s   8   5.0  1.4  1 0  10  20  10   0   1  3  1L/---  no ---- ----- 48%*}}

  Modifying the blueprints happesn with modify command, for example:
    {{modify speed 4}}

if you would like your shuttle to move faster. Hint: You want your shuttle to
move faster.

  As you see the factory has 48% damage, so it will take a few segments before
it is ready to produce shuttles. You need to load crew into the factory and
order it on before it begins to repair itself. So what you need to do is this:
    {{load #357 crew}}
    {{order #357 on}}

  When your factory is ready cs in it again and give a command
    {{build (number)}}

where number is the number of shuttles you want to build. Take a look at
hyperdrive too...

  Important ships (see also __help ships__)"
    Spore Pod - This is what you build first if you have the capability
    Toxic Waste Container - When your planet's toxicity rises too much
    Factory - The first ship the normal races build
    Weapons Plant - To produce destruction
    Governmental Center - No need to build more if your original still exists
    Ground Telescope - To see what kind of planets exist in your system
    Space Plow - This will raise your population, build a few and some domes
    Shuttle - The first step inhabiting craft
    Dome - When all shuttles are on their way build a lot of these
    Explorer - The second step inhabiting craft, these can even shoot
    Missile - One of the main weapons when tech is not very high
    Terraforming Device - The favorite ship of everyone
    Atmosphere Processor - Build one on every colony except your home planet
    Anti-Ballistic Missile Battery - Basic planetary defence equipment
    Tanker - You will need more fuel than you believe, take advantage of these

  Second step ship construction commands are...__upgrade__, __scrap__

& combat

__{{Time To Fight}}__

  First step combact commands are __tactical__, __fire__, __assault__,
__capture__

  You see an enemy's ship. If you are in a situation that you want it dead, then
you can shoot it. First examing the situation. If your destroyer (or whatever
ship that can shoot) is near the enemy's ship, you can take a tactical report.
Type
    {{tactical #357}}

  In this example #357 is your ship's number. You can also use ship-type marker
like this:
    {{tactical d}}

where d means all destroyers. OK...if enemy is near enough and you have
destruction, you can shoot it.
    {{first #357 #911}}

where #911 is the number of the enemy's ship. Maybe you do not hit or destroy it
and in that case just fire again.

  If you do not want to shoot enemy's ship you can try assualt. First steer your
ship next to enemy
    {{order #357 dest #911}}

This movement takes one or more segments. (you had better have faster ship than
the pursued one.) But when ships are next to each others...
    {{assualt #357 #911 (number) (what)}}

(what) is mil or civ, and depends from what you have on board. (number) is the
number of attackers. Note: the target ship gets one free shot when you
assault...so your assault might stop sooner than you hope. If enemy ship is
landed on your sector you can try to capture it. Type
    {{capture #911 (number) [(what)]}}

(what) is mil or civ, mil being default, so if you try to capture the ship with
mil, you do not have to specify it. (number) is the number of attackers.

  Second step combat commands are __bombard__, __defend__, __deploy__

& money

__{{Money, Money}}__

  First step commands concerning money are: __tax__, __technology__,
__treasury__

  You need money. How to get money? Ever heard about taxes? So, tax your
population. Taxing has few disadvantages. Your production on taxed planets
suffers and taxed planets become more vulnerable to civil revolts financied by
your enemy. The more population you have on a planet the more money that planet
will produce. So do not tax too small colonies or use too high taxrate. Example:
    {{tax 20}}

  Now your colony's tax rate closes to 20% with speed of 5%/update. How can you
use your money? The most important use is the tech investment. Give money to
your colonies so that they gain technology for your race. You notice quite soon
that one colony can not produce much technology, so spread and get many
colonies. And how much money can you use? Type:
    {{treasury}}

and you see how much money you have, how much you gained and how much you spent
last update. Most ships and all troops requires some maintenance money and rest
of expenses are tech investments. Just figure out how much you can afford into
tech investments and then split and invest it on your empire like this:
    {{cd /System/Planet}}
    {{tech (amount of money}}

  Also figure out how opttech works.

  Second step commands concerning money are...__pay__, __transfer__, __sell__

& ships

__{{Important Ships}}__

  These are the ships you need to be familiar with first.

__Spore Pod__ (This is what races with pods build first)

  This is a small seed pod grown by a mesomorphic race and is used primarily to
colonize other planets. A Pod can be landed like a normal ship upon reaching a
destination. however, a Pod can also be warmed by a star, causing it to explode,
possibly seeding a random planet in that start system. Deterioration builds up
in a Pod and will eventually cause it to decay. Pods usually last around four
updates.

__Toxic Waste Container__ (When planet's toxicity rises too much)

  This is a sealed container used to store environmental poisons. When toxicity
of a planet becomes too high, constructing one of these containers will reduce
the poison level by 20%. If the contains is breached, however, the toxic waste
inside it will escape.

__Factory__ (The first ship that normal races build)

  A Factory is built to produce other ships. To see a list of ships which must
be built in a Factory, see the help topic 'build'. After being built, descend to
the ship's scope and specify the ship type this Factory will be able to produce
with the 'make' command. The stats of the ship to be produced can then be
modified by using the 'modify' command. Finally, the Factory must be ordered
online with the 'order' command. Once activated it cannot be turned off, nor can
the specification of the ships it is to manufacture be altered in any way.

  A Factory is built with 75% damage. This represents the time it will take to
start up production. Damage will repair itself during movement segments
automatically. To begin repairing however the ship must first be ordered 'on'.

  See '__help build__' for more information regarding factories.

__Weapons Plant__ (To produce destruction)

  This installation produces destruct. Players feed the plant resources and
fuel, and these are converted into destruct during each update. Each destruct
produced costs one fuel and one resource point. The maximum amount of destruct
a fully manned and undamaged plant can produce in one update is given by the
owner's current technology divided by two. This ship is built with 75% damage.
Construction must be completed manually.

__Governmental Center__ (No need to build more if original still exist)

  This represents the seat of government of an entire civilization. Although
superficially a ship, it is not designed to be moved; if your capitol is not
landed on a planet, it produces no action points. However it can be launched
and landed like any other ship should an emergency arise. If a capitol is
destroyed another one must be designated with the 'captiol' command. Note that
it is possible to maintain more than one government center; this has no benefit
beyond serving as a backup in the case of destruction of the current captiol.
This ship is built with 75% damage. construction must be completed manually.

__Ground Telescope__ (To see what kind of planets exists in the system)

  This is a ground based astronomical facility. It is able to survey the nearest
planets for mapping purposes. The tech level of a race determines the
telescope's range at build time. Ranges for telescopes built before the next
update are listed in a race's profile.

  Usage: order i aim (target planet)

__Space Plow__ (This will rise your population. Build a few of these along with
                domes when all shuttles are on their way)

  This type of ship allows you to increase the fertility of sectors. Once
activated and given a move command (see the command 'order' for more help), a
fully manned and undamaged plow will increase the fertility of each sector
traveres by 10%. If it reaches the north or south of the planet map, it will
bounce off and continue. There is also a jump option to move Plow automatically
into own low fertility sector. The Space Plow uses two fuel per update. Plowing
can increase the toxicity level on a planet.

__Shuttle__ (The first step inhabiting craft)

  This is a small, short-range spacecraft, intended for exploration and for
shuttling things between ground and orbit. This ship is also useful for
assembling other ships in space, as resources can be transferred from another
ship using the load command until it is carrying more than the maximum cargo.
The Shuttle, however, cannot take off or land with this extra cargo. Shutles are
one of the few classes of ships that can construct other ships.

__Dome__ (When all shuttles are on their way build a lot of these, except if you
          are a jovian)

  This ship can be used to increase sector efficiencies. At maximum crew the
efficieny an undamaged Dome can increase the efficiency by 5% per update. A Dome
must be switched on to be effective. If a Dome is set to autoscrap (with the
'order' command), the Dome will be automatically scrapped upon reaching a sector
efficiency of 100%. There is a jump option for Dome to make it automatically
jump into own low efficiency sector. A dome uses one resource per update.

__Explorer__ (The second step inhabiting craft after shuttles. These can even
	      shoot :))

  This is a small and fast exploration craft with some armor. It has increased
range over shuttle and it's the smallest shiptype capable to jump. It is more
heavily armed than a shuttle. This is not a ship to tangle warships, although it
is rather ideal for armed recon.

__Missile__ (One of the main weapons when tech is not yet very high. The larger
	     group, the better effectivity)

  This weapon can be used to attack enemy planets or ships. In order to attack
with a missile, they must be launched and then given a destination. If the
destination is a ship it will detonate upon reaching the enemy ship. If the
destination is a planet, the missile will impact on the desginated sector. See
help on 'order' for designating missile impact coordinates. A missile may be
designated to impact a specific sector, or may be allowed to randomly hit the
planet. A missile aimed for a planet will automatically switch its target to any
Planetary Defense Networks protecting the planet. The only automatic defense
against missiles is the ABM battery.

__Terraforming Device__ (The favourite ship of everyone)

  This device alters the surface of a planet to better suit its owner. Once
activated and given a move command (see the command 'order' for more help), the
Terraforming Device moves each update to a new position, altering sectors as it
goes. It will move first, then terraform, so that it will not destroy the sector
on which it was built. And sector terraformed will have its efficiency and
mobilization count reduced to 0. 'Gas' sectors can not be terraformed to any
other type of sector, but not vice versa. Terraforming requires three fuel per
update. Terraforming can increase the toxicity level of a planet.

__Atmosphere Processor__ (Build one on every colony except on your home planet)

  This is a large machine (of the type in {{Aliens}}) that sucks in the
atmosphere of a planet, converting it to the type of air preferred by its owner.
You must load crew into these objects for them to operate. The device also must
be activated with the order command. Larger planets take longer to convert than
smaller planets. The Processor uses three fuel units per turn.

__Anit-Ballistic Missile Battery__ (Basic planetary device equipment along
		 	 	    with G)

  This unit represent a battery of guns which can be used to attempt to down
incoming aline missiles. If activated, each battery will fire at the
predesignated salvo strength at each missile in orbit around the planet it is
based upon during each update. The defensive fire is evaluated after missile
movement, but before impact is evaluated. ABMs represent a last line of defense
against missile attackes and are executed automatically. The more batteries a
planet has the more change of intercepting and incoming missile. This ship is
built with 50% damage. Construction must be completed manually.

__Tanker__ (You will need more fuel than you believe, take advantage of these)

  This ship can carry large amonuts of fuel and moderate amounts of other
commodities. In addition, it can also collect fuel at a high rate, which is
one fifth of tanker's fuel capacity, by orbiting a gas giant. They have very
small gunnery strengths and light armor, but since they are relatively huge they
have a lot of staminal strength against attacks.

  Take a look at all other ships too. __ships__
